          James Joseph Sylvester
     Collected Mathematical Papers, Vol. I
New work: Paper 42 continuation, book pp. 307–327
                                                      42.
               On the Principles of the Calculus of Forms
        [Cambridge and Dublin Mathematical Journal, vii. (1852), pp. 52–97]
                                                                                                 p. 307
   Commutants thus formed may be termed total commutants, because the entire
of each line is made to pass through all its possible forms of arrangement. In
total commutants it is necessary that the number of lines r be even; for if taken
odd, on making all the r lines to change, instead of obtaining 1 · 2 · · · n lines, the
result obtained when all but one are made to change, it will be found that the
latter will be repeated 12 (1 · 2 · · · n) times with the sign +, and 12 (1 · 2 · · · n) times
with the sign −, so that the algebraical sum of the terms will be zero. Moreover
the commutants of the species above described, besides being total, are simple,
inasmuch as all the umbræ to be termed consist of single letters.
   My first proposition in the application of the theory of commutants to that of
forms is as follows:
   Let ϕ be a function homogeneous and linear in respect to an even number r
of any systems whatever of variables, as

                      x1 , y1 . . . t1 ;        x2 , y2 . . . t2 ;     xr , yr . . . tr .

Form the commutant
                                            d        d          d
                                                ,        , ···     ,
                                           dx1      dy1        dt1
                                            d        d          d
                                                ,        , ···     ,
                                           dx2      dy2        dt2
                                            ···      ···     ···
                                            d        d          d
                                                ,        , ···     .
                                           dxr      dyr        dtr
Let the general term of this commutant, expanded, be called

                                           Fθ1 × Fθ2 × · · · × Fθr ,

then is
                                  ΣFθ1 ·ϕ × Fθ2 ·ϕ × · · · × Fθr ·ϕ
a covariant or invariant1 as the case may be, of ϕ.
    Be it observed that the march of the substitution for the different sets of
variables in the above proposition is supposed to be perfectly independent. All
the systems but one may undergo linear transformation, or they may all undergo
distinct and disconnected transformations at the same time, and the proposition
still continue applicable. It will however evidently be no less applicable should the
   1
       See below, p. 324.


                                                        2
march of substitution for any of the systems become cogredient or contragredient
to that of any other systems.
   If we suppose ϕ to be a function of an even degree r of a single system of
n variables x, y . . . t, so that the r systems x1 , y1 , &c., x2 , y2 , &c. . . . xr , yr , &c.
become identical, we can at once infer from the above scheme the existence and
mode of forming an invariant to ϕ of the order n. This last appears                              p. 308
   for the case n = 2, and ought, for all other values of n, to have been known2
to the author of the immortal discovery of invariants, termed by him hyperdeter-
minants, in the sense which, according to the nomenclature here adopted, would
be conveyed by the term hyperdiscriminants.
   Before proceeding to discuss the theory of compound total commutants, or
enlarging upon that of partial commutants, I shall make an interesting application
of the preceding general proposition to the discovery of Aronhold’s S and T ,
the two invariants respectively of the fourth and sixth orders appertaining to
a homogeneous cubic function (say F ) of three variables x, y, z. These may be
termed respectively H4 and H6 . As to H6 a theoretically possible but eminently
prolix and ungraceful method immediately presents itself, namely to take F 2 = G,
and after forming the commutant with six lines,
                                          d      d     d
                                            ,      ,      ,
                                         dx     dy     dz
                                          d      d     d
                                            ,      ,      ,
                                         dx     dy     dz
                                          d      d     d
                                            ,      ,      ,
                                         dx     dy     dz
                                          d      d     d
                                            ,      ,      ,
                                         dx     dy     dz
                                          d      d     d
                                            ,      ,      ,
                                         dx     dy     dz
                                          d      d     d
                                            ,      ,      ,
                                         dx     dy     dz

to operate with the 65 ternary products of which this is made up upon G: the
result being an invariant of G, will be so to F , and being of the third degree in
   2
    That this was not known explicitly to and should have escaped the penetration of the
sagacious author of the theory, and those who had studied his papers, must be attributed to the
imperfection of the notation heretofore employed for denoting the coefficients of a homogeneous
polynomial function. The umbral method of denoting such a function ϕ of the degree r under the
form of (ax + by + · · · + cz)r , which is equivalent to, but a more compendious and independent
mode of mentally conceiving and handling the representation
                                                             r
                                       d     d           d
                                  x      +y    + ··· + z           ϕ,
                                      dx    dy           dz

exhibits the true internal constitution of such functions, and necessarily leads to the discovery
of their essential properties and attributes.


                                                 3
respect to the coefficients of G, will be of the sixth in respect to those of F . It
will evidently therefore be H6 , or at least a numerical multiple of H6 , the form of
which, inasmuch as the only other invariant is H4 , we know inform to be unique.
But the general theorem affords another and probably the                              p. 309
                                   3
   most practically compendious solution as regards H6 , of which the question
admits.
   Let G4 represent the mixed concomitant to F formed by the bordered deter-
minant
                              d2 F     d2 F     d2 F
                                 2
                                                      ξ
                              dx      dx dy dx dz
                              d2 F     d2 F     d2 F
                                                      η
                            dy dx      dy 2    dy dz     .
                              d2 F     d2 F     d2 F
                                                      ζ
                             dz dx dz dy        dz 2
                               ξ         η       ζ    0
G is a function of the second order as to x, y, z, and of the like order in respect
to ξ, η, ζ, which two systems will be respectively cogredient and contragredient
in respect to the x, y, z system in F . In other words, which is all we need to look
to, G is a concomitant of F , and so also will be

                                  G + λ(xξ + yη + zζ)2 ,

which may be termed H. Form now the commutant
                                        d      d     d
                                          ,      ,      ,
                                       dx     dy     dz
                                        d      d     d
                                          ,      ,      ,
                                       dx     dy     dz
                                        d      d     d
                                          ,      ,      ,
                                       dξ     dη     dζ
                                        d      d     d
                                          ,      ,      ,
                                       dξ     dη     dζ
   3
     Having since this was printed been favoured with a view of some of the proof-sheets of Mr
Salmon’s most valuable Second Part of his System of Analytical Geometry (about to appear,
and which is calculated, in my opinion, to awaken a higher idea of and excite a new taste
for geometrical researches in this country), I find that I am mistaken in this point; the less
symmetrical method operated with by Mr Salmon being decidedly of the shortest for practically
obtaining S and T in the general case. Symmetry, like the grace of an eastern robe, has not
unfrequently to be purchased at the expense of some sacrifice of freedom and rapidity of action.
   4
     G is the mixed concomitant to the given cubic function, which is halfway (so to speak)
between it and its polar reciprocal. In fact, when the operation is repeated upon G, which was
executed upon the given function to obtain G (that is, when we border the Hessian of G in
respect to x, y, z, vertically and horizontally with the column and line ξ, η, ζ) the determinant
thereby represented becomes the polar reciprocal to the given function.




                                               4
this being applied to H will give an invariant (the fact that the march of
the substitutions for the systems x, y, z; ξ, η, ζ is contrary, being completely
immaterial to the applicability of the general theorem above given);                p. 310
   the commutant so formed will be a cubic function of λ, in which the coefficient
of λ3 is a numerical quantity, that of λ2 is zero, that of λ is H4 and the constant
term is H6 .
   Thus for example let F = x3 + y 3 + z 3 + 6mxyz, then
                                        x mz my ξ
                                        mz y mx η
                               G=
                                        my mx z ζ
                                         ξ  η ζ 0
and therefore
           H = Σ{(λ − m2 )x2 ξ 2 + (λ + m2 )2yzηζ + yzξ 2 − 2mx2 ηζ},
the Σ implying the sum of similar terms with reference to the interchanges
between x, ξ; y, η; z, ζ.
   In developing the commutant above, the first line may be kept in a fixed
position; for the sake of brevity, (x), (y), (z); (ξ), (η), (ζ) may be written in the
place of
                        d     d     d          d       d      d
                          ,     ,      ;         ,       ,       ,
                       dx    dy     dz        dξ      dη      dζ
and it will readily be seen that the only effective arrangements will be as
underwritten:
              (x)(y)(z)   (x)(y)(z)   (x)(y)(z)
              (x)(y)(z)   (x)(y)(z)   (x)(y)(z)
              (ξ)(η)(ζ)   (η)(ζ)(ξ)   (ζ)(ξ)(η)
              (ξ)(η)(ζ)   (ζ)(ξ)(η)   (η)(ζ)(ξ)
              (x)(y)(z)   (x)(y)(z)   (x)(y)(z)       (x)(y)(z)   (x)(y)(z)   (x)(y)(z)
              (x)(z)(y)   (x)(z)(y)   (ξ)(η)(ζ)       (z)(y)(x)   (y)(x)(z)   (y)(x)(z)
              (ξ)(η)(ζ)   (ξ)(ζ)(η)   (ξ)(η)(ζ)       (ζ)(η)(ξ)   (ξ)(η)(ζ)   (η)(ξ)(ζ)
              (ξ)(ζ)(η)   (ξ)(η)(ζ)   (ξ)(η)(ζ)       (ξ)(η)(ζ)   (η)(ξ)(ζ)   (ξ)(η)(ζ)
              (x)(y)(z)   (x)(y)(z)   (x)(y)(z)       (x)(y)(z)   (x)(y)(z)   (x)(y)(z)
              (y)(z)(x)   (z)(x)(y)   (y)(z)(x)       (y)(z)(x)   (z)(x)(y)   (z)(x)(y)
              (ξ)(η)(ζ)   (η)(ζ)(ξ)   (ζ)(η)(ξ)       (η)(ζ)(ξ)   (ξ)(η)(ζ)   (ζ)(ξ)(η)
              (ξ)(ζ)(η)   (η)(ξ)(ζ)   (η)(ζ)(ξ)       (ξ)(η)(ζ)   (ζ)(η)(ξ)   (ξ)(η)(ζ).
                                                                                           p. 311
   The signs of the four lines in each of these arrangements are two alike, and
two contrary to the signs of the correspondent lines in the first arrangement;
hence the effective sign is the same for all, and the result, after rejecting from
each term the common factor −16, is seen, from inspection, to be
 4(λ − m2 )3 − 8m3 + 6(λ − m2 )(λ + m2 )2 − 12m(λ + m2 )2 + 2(λ + m2 )3 + 1,
which is equal to
                12λ3 + 0 · λ2 − 12(m − m4 )λ + 1 − 20m3 − 8m6 ;

                                                  5
here the coefficients m−m4 and 1−20m3 −8m6 are the two invariants (Aronhold’s
S and T ) for the canonical form operated upon; and it will be observed that

                  (1 − 20m3 − 8m6 )2 + 64(m − m4 )3 = (1 + 8m3 )3 ,

which is easily proved to be the discriminant of

                                  x3 + y 3 + z 3 + 6mxyz.

   It may however be observed, that this is not the discriminant of the function
in λ just found, as reasons of analogy5 might have suggested it probably would
be: in order that this might be the case, the coefficient of λ3 should be 4 instead
of 12, and of λ, m − m4 instead of m4 − m. There is ground for supposing that
another function of λ may be found by a different method, in which this relation
will take effect.
   The theorem above given for simple total commutants admits of an interesting
application to the general case of a function F of the nth degree, in respect to
each of two independent systems of two variables x, y; ξ, η. Let F be symbolically
represented by (ax + by)n (αξ + βη)n , so that an αn represents the coefficient of
xn ξ n , nan−1 bαn of xn−1 yξ n , &c. &c.; then the commutant

                                        a, b, (1)
                                        a, b, (2)
                                        ··· ···
                                        a, b, (n)
                                        α, β, (1)
                                        α, β, (2)
                                        ··· ···
                                        α, β, (n)

will represent a quadratic invariant of F , which will contain (n + 1)2 coefficients.
By expanding this commutant we obtain a general expression for the invariant
under a very interesting form.                                                        p. 312
   I now proceed to give the general theorem for compound total commutants as
applicable to the discovery of invariants.
   Let there be a function of m disconnected classes of systems of variables; let
the systems in the same class be supposed all distinct but cogredient with one
another. The function is supposed to be linear in respect to each system in each
class, and the number of systems is the same for all the classes, and the number
   5
     The biquadratic function of x, y having only one parameter, and therefore two invariants,
its theory possesses striking analogies to the theory of the cubic function of three letters. The
function in λ which gives these invariants for the first-named function, according to the method
given in the first section, has the same discriminant as the function itself.



                                               6
of variables the same in each system. This function may then be represented
symbolically under the form
       (1 a1 1 x1 + 1 b1 1 y1 + · · · + 1 l1 1 t1 )(1 a2 1 x2 + 1 b2 1 y2 + · · · + 1 l2 1 t2 )
          · · · (1 an 1 xn + 1 bn 1 yn + · · · + 1 ln 1 tn )
       × (2 a1 2 x1 + 2 b1 2 y1 + · · · + 2 l1 2 t1 )(2 a2 2 x2 + 2 b2 2 y2 + · · · + 2 l2 2 t2 )
          · · · (2 an 2 xn + 2 bn 2 yn + · · · + 2 ln 2 tn ) × &c.
       × (p a1 p x1 + p b1 p y1 + · · · + p l1 p t1 )(p a2 p x2 + p b2 p y2 + · · · + p l2 p t2 )
          · · · (p an p xn + p bn p yn + · · · + p ln p tn ).
In this expression the x, y . . . t’s are all real, but the a, b . . . l’s all umbral; in fact,
f a , f b , &c. may be understood to denote
   g     g

                                       d                   d
                                            ,                   ,    &c.
                                     d f xg              d f yg
The n systems of variables in each of the sets above written are supposed to be
cogredient inter se.
  Take the symbolical product of the first set, first making for the moment
          1
              x1 = 1 x2 = · · · 1 xn = x,         &c. &c.,            1
                                                                           t1 = 1 t2 = · · · 1 tn = t;
and let the coefficients of the several terms
                                       xn ,       xn−1 y . . . &c.,
be called
                                       1           1
                                           A1 ,        A2 , . . . 1 Aµ ,
where µ is the number of terms contained in a homogeneous function of the nth
degree of the m variables x, y . . . t. In like manner proceed with each of the lines,
and then write down the commutant
                                     1A ,         1A ,      ···     1A
                                       1            2                    µ,
                                     2A ,         2A ,      ···     2A
                                       1            2                    µ,
                                      ···         ···               ···
                                     pA ,         pA ,      ···     pA
                                       1            2                    µ.

This commutant is an invariant of F : it will of course be remembered that, unless
p is even, the commutant vanishes.                                                 p. 313
   Thus, for example, take two sets of two systems of two variables: in all four
systems,
                          x, y; ξ, η : p, q; ϕ, ψ,
each couple of systems on either side of the colon (:) being cogredient inter se:
and let F be symbolically represented by
                          (ax + by)(αξ + βη)(lp + mq)(λϕ + µψ);

                                                        7
then the invariant given by the theorem will be the commutant

                                        aα; aβ + αb; bβ,
                                        lλ; lµ + λm; mµ.

The six positions of this are as below written (the first three being positive and
the second three negative)

                aα; aβ + αb; bβ, aα; aβ + αb; bβ, aα; aβ + αb; bβ,
               lλ; lµ + λm; mµ, lµ + λm; mµ; lλ, mµ; lλ; lµ + λm,
                aα; aβ + αb; bβ, aα; aβ + αb; bβ, aα; aβ + αb; bβ,
               lµ + λm; lλ; mµ, lλ; mµ; lµ + λm, mµ; lµ + λm; lλ.

If we write F under its explicit form,

                      Axξpϕ + Bxξpψ + Cxξqϕ + Dxξqψ
                       + A′ xηpϕ + B ′ xηpψ + C ′ xηqϕ + D′ xηqψ
                       + A′′ yξpϕ + B ′′ yξpψ + C ′′ yξqϕ + D′′ yξqψ
                       + A′′′ yηpϕ + B ′′′ yηpψ + C ′′′ yηqϕ + D′′′ yηqψ,

we have identically the relations following,

                 aαlλ = A,        aαlµ = B,         aαmλ = C,           aαmµ = D,
                 aβlλ = A′ ,      aβlµ = B ′ ,      aβmλ = C ′ ,        aβmµ = D′ ,
                 bαlλ = A′′ ,     bαlµ = B ′′ ,     bαmλ = C ′′ ,       bαmµ = D′′ ,
                 bβlλ = A′′′ ,    bβlµ = B ′′′ ,    bβmλ = C ′′′ ,      bβmµ = D′′′ .

and the commutant expanded becomes

               A(B ′ + C ′′ + C ′ + B ′′ )D′′′ + (B + C)(D′ + D′′ )A′′′
                  + D(A′ + A′′ )(B ′′′ + C ′′′ ) − (B + C)(A′ + A′′ )D′′′
                  − A(D′ + D′′ )(B ′′′ + C ′′′ ) − D(B ′ + C ′′ + C ′ + B ′′ )A′′′ .

In the foregoing the x’s in the several lines were for the moment taken identical,
in order the more easily to explain the law of formation of the                    p. 314
   quantities A. But suppose that they become actually identical for the same
line. F then becomes a function of the nth degree in respect to each of p systems
of variables, and may be represented symbolically under the form

(1 a 1 x+1 b 1 y+· · ·+1 l 1 t)n ×(2 a 2 x+2 b 2 y+· · ·+2 l 2 t)n · · ·×(p a p x+p b p y+· · ·+p l p t)n .

We may still further limit the generality of the theorem by supposing
1
    x = 2 x = · · · p x = x,      1
                                      y = 2 y = · · · p y = y,      ··· ,       1
                                                                                    t = 2 t = · · · p t = t;


                                                    8
F then becomes
                              (ax + by + · · · + lt)np .
Accordingly, as many different factors as can be found contained an even number
of times in the exponent of the function, so many invariants can be formed
immediately from a function of any number of variables m by the method of
total commutation.
   If one of these factors be called n, the commutant corresponding thereto will
be of the order
                           (n + 1)(n + 2) · · · (n + m − 1)
                                   1 · 2 · · · (m − 1)
in respect to the coefficients. Thus take m = 2, so that

                                  F = (ax + by)np .

The general form of such a commutant will be found by taking A1 , A2 . . . An+1
the coefficients of the several combinations of x, y in (ax + by)n , from which the
numerical coefficients n, 21 n(n − 1), &c. may be rejected, as only introducing a
numerical factor into the result; the commutant will therefore be expressed by
means of the form
                      an ; an−1 b; an−2 b2 . . . ; bn ,    (1)
                      an ; an−1 b; an−2 b2 . . . ; bn ,    (2)
                                 ···············
                       n
                      a ; a n−1 b; an−2 b2 . . . ; bn .    (p)

If p = 2, the compound commutant

                             an ; an−1 b; · · · ; bn ,
                             an ; an−1 b; · · · ; bn ,
                                                                                       p. 315
  will easily be seen to be only another form for the catalecticant of (ax + by)2n .
Thus, let n = 2,

             (ax + by)4 = Ax4 + 4Bx3 y + 6Cx2 y 2 + 4Dxy 3 + Ey 4 ;

so that

          a4 = A,     a3 b = B,      a2 b2 = C,       ab3 = D,    b4 = E.

The commutant (which is of the form of the matrix to an ordinary determinant,
with the exception that the umbræ enter compoundly instead of simply into the
several terms separated by the marks of punctuation), will be

                                   a2 ; ab; b2 ,
                                   a2 ; ab; b2 :

                                          9
this, written in the six forms
                                   )                      )                      )
                   a2 ; ab; b2            a2 ; ab; b2            a2 ; ab; b2
                   a2 ; ab; b2            a2 ; b2 ; ab           ab; a2 ; b2
                                   )                      )                      )
                   a2 ; ab; b2            a2 ; ab; b2            a2 ; ab; b2
                   b2 ; ab; a2            ab; b2 ; a2            b2 ; a2 ; ab

gives the expression

       a4 × a2 b2 × b4 − a4 × (ab3 )2 − b4 × (a3 b)2 − (a2 b2 )3 + 2a3 b × ab3 × a2 b2 ;

that is
                           ACE − AD2 − EB 2 − C 3 + 2BCD.

    One important observation may here be made of a fact which otherwise might
easily escape attention, which is, that commutants, where the same terms simple
or compound are found in all or several of the lines, in general give rise to
products, some of them equal and with the same sign, and others equal but with
the contrary sign.
    This last phenomenon does not manifest itself in commutants appertaining
to functions of two variables of the two particular and different species which
first and most naturally present themselves, namely where there are only two
lines or only two columns6 —I believe that it displays itself in every other case
of commutantives to functions of two variables. Thus it is that algebraical
expressions derived from given functions disguise their symmetry; to make
which come to light it becomes necessary to add terms of contrary sign to such
expressions. As an example, the reader is invited to develope the cubic invariant
of a function of x and y, symbolically expressed by (ax + by)8 , where

                      a8 = A,          a7 b = B . . . ab7 = H,        b8 = I,
                                                                                                        p. 316
   by means of the commutant

                                          a2 ,   ab, b2 ,
                                          a2 ,   ab, b2 ,
                                          a2 ,   ab, b2 ,
                                          a2 ,   ab, b2 .7

  Suppose F to be the general even-degreed function of two variables of the
degree 2np.
   6
     These commutants give respectively the quadrinvariant and the catalecticant, the former of
which alone was formerly recognised by Mr Cayley as a commutant.
   7
     See p. 346 below. The number of terms resulting from the independent permutation of
each of the 3 linear lines is 63 , that is 216; but the actual result is (using small letters instead


                                                 10
   Let                                         np
                                    d     d
                               
                         H= ξ         −η             F + λ(xξ + yη)np ,
                                   dy    dx
and express H umbrally under the form

                                   (ax + by)np (αξ + βη)np .
                                                                                                        p. 317

of large) P − Q, where

                    P = aei + 3ag 2 + 12beh + 3c2 i + 24cf 2 + 24d2 g + 15e3 ,
                    Q = 4af h + 4bid + 8bgf + 22ceg + 8chd + 36def,

so that the effective number of permutations is only 164. The difference between this and 216
                                                                                          52
divided by 216 may be termed the Index of Demolition, which we see in this case is 216       or 13
                                                                                                 54
                                                                                                    ;
                              1
that is, somewhat less than 4 . For the cubic invariant of the function of the fourth degree this
index is zero, all the permutations being effective. If we take the cubic invariant of the function
ax12 + 12bx11 y + 66cx10 y 2 + &c. + my 12 under the form P − Q, we shall find

         P = 6ahl + 10ajj + 60f m + 54bhk + 54cf l + 156cii + 10ddm + 430djj
             + 155eek + 520ehh + 520f f l + 280ggg,
         Q = agm + 15aik + 30bgl + 50bij + 15cem + 4cgk + 150chj + 30del + 210df k
             + 250dhi + 230ef j + 555egl + 660f gh.

The number of terms in P and Q is of course the same, and will be found to be 2200 for each;
so that out of the 65 , that is 7776 permutations of the 5 lower rows, only 4400 are effective,
and the index of demolition becomes 3376
                                       7776
                                            , that is 211
                                                      486
                                                                                   5
                                                          , or rather greater than 12 . The Index of
Demolition thus goes on constantly increasing as the degree of the function rises; probably (?)
it converges either towards 12 or else towards unity. In arranging the terms it will be found
most convenient to adopt, as I have done above, the dictionary method of sequence. The
computations are greatly facilitated by the circumstance of the effect of any arrangement of
each of the 5 lower lines not being altered when these lines are permuted with one another;
this gives rise to the subdivision of the 7776 permutations into groups as follows: 6 of 120
identical terms, 60 of 60, 36 of 20, 60 of 30, 24 of 20, 30 of 10, 30 of 5, and 6 of 1. So that the
total number of permutational arrangements to be constructed is only 252. Other methods
of abridging the labour will readily suggest themselves to the practical computer. The total
number of the groups of terms is of course always known à priori, and, for instance, in the
case before us, must be equal to the number of ways in which 12 (12 × 3), that is the number
18, can be divided into 3 parts, none of which is to exceed the number 12, that is 25; for the
cubic invariant of the function of the eighth degree of two variables it is the number of ways in
which 12 can be divided into 3 parts, of which none shall exceed 8, and so forth, zeros being
always understood to be admissible; and of course in general for an invariant of the order r to
a function of the degree n of i variables, the number of distinct terms is in general the number
of ways in which nri
                     can be divided into r parts, of which none shall exceed n, subject however
always to the possibility in particular cases of a diminution in consequence of some of the
groups assuming zero for their coefficient.




                                                11
   The commutant
                               an ,    an−1 b · · ·   bn ,   (1)
                               an ,    an−1 b · · ·   bn ,   (2)
                                      ············
                               an ,    an−1 b · · ·   bn , (p)
                               αn ,   αn−1 β · · ·    β n , (1)
                               αn ,   αn−1 β · · ·    β n , (2)
                                      ············
                               αn ,   αn−1 β · · ·    β n , (p)
will be a function of λ, and all the several coefficients will be invariants of F 8 .
   When p = 1 we obtain the Λ given in the preceding section, and originally
published by me in the Philosophical Magazine for the month of November, 1851.
The Λ obtained on this supposition has for its coefficients a series of independent
invariants, commencing with the catalecticant and closing with the quadratic
invariant. When p has any other value, we observe a similar series commencing
with a commutantive invariant of a lower order than the catalecticant, but always
closing with the quadratic invariant. Thus, for example, when 2np = 8, we may
obtain by the preceding theorem three different quadratic functions; one giving
the invariants of the orders 5, 4, 3, 2, the second those of the orders 3, 2, the
third the invariant of the order 2.
   In this case the invariants of the same order given by the different Λ’s are the
same to numerical factors près. Whether this is always necessarily the case is a
point reserved for further examination.
   The commutants applied in the preceding theorems have been called by me
total commutants, because the total of each line of umbræ is permuted in every
possible manner. If the lines be divided into segments, and the permutation be
local for each segment instead of extending itself over the whole line, we then
arrive at the notion of partial commutants, to which I have also (in concert with
Mr Cayley) given the distinctive name of Intermutants. In order to find the
invariants of functions of odd degrees, the theory of total commutants requires
the process of commutation to be applied, not immediately to the coefficients of
the proposed function, but to some derived concomitant form. I became early
sensible of this imperfection, and stated to the friend above named, to whom I
had previously                                                                        p. 318
   imparted my general method of total commutation, my conviction of the
existence of a qualified or restricted method of permutation, whereby the invari-
ants of the cubic function, for instance, of two and of three letters would admit,
   8                               d    d
     By substituting the symbols dx  , dy , &c. in place of the umbræ a, b, &c., the theorem is
easily stated for covariants generally. But in applying the commutantive method to obtain
covariants, or rather in the statement of the results flowing from each application, it is never
necessary to go beyond the case of invariants, because the commutantive covariants of any
given homogeneous function are always identical with commutantive invariants of emanants of
the same function.


                                              12
without the aid of a derived form, of being represented. Many months ago, when
I was engaged in this important research, and had made some considerable steps
towards the representation of the invariant, that is, the discriminant of the cubic
function of x and y, under the form of a single permutant, I was surprised by
a note from the friend above alluded to, announcing that he had succeeded in
fixing the form of the permutant of which I was at that moment in search. It is
with no intention of complaining of this interference on the part of one to whose
example and conversation I feel so deeply indebted, (and the undisputed author
of the theory of Invariants,) that I may be permitted to say that, independent
of the intervention of this communication, I must inevitably have succeeded in
shaping my method so as to furnish the form in question; and that with greater
certainty, after my theory of commutants had furnished me with the precedent
of permutable forms giving rise to terms identical in value but affected with
contrary signs. As I have understood that Mr Cayley is likely to develop this
part of the subject in the present number of the Journal, it will be the less
necessary for me to enter at any length into the theory of partial commutants
on the present occasion.
   The method of partial commutation is a simple but most important corollary
from that of total commutation hereinbefore explained. To fix the ideas, conceive
a class of p cogredient systems, and that there are qr such classes perfectly
independent. Proceed to divide these qr classes in any manner whatever into
r sets, each containing q classes; and form the symbol of the total commutant
corresponding to each such set. Now let these commutants be placed side by side
against one another, and transpose the terms in each compound line thus formed
once for all, but in any arbitrary manner. Then permute in every possible way
all those symbols in each line, inter se, which belong to the same class, and
operate with the symbols thus produced by reading off the vertical columns and
attending to the rule of the + and − signs, as in the case of a total commutant;
the result will be a commutant of the form operated upon. For instance, let
p = 1, q = 3, r = 2, and let the number of variables in each system be 2. Form
the commutant operators
                               d      d           d      d
                                 ,      ,           ,      ,
                              dx     dy          dξ     dη
                               d      d           d      d
                                 ,      ,           ,      ,
                              dp     dt          dϕ     dθ
                               d      d           d      d
                                 ,      ,           ,      .
                              dr     ds          dρ     dσ
                                                                                      p. 319




                                            13
  Interchange in any manner but once for all the symbols in each line, as thus:
                                    d       d          d        d
                                      ,       ,           ,       ,
                                   dx      dy          dξ      dη
                                    d       d          d        d
                                      ,       ,           ,       ,
                                   dϕ      dp          dt      dθ
                                    d       d          d        d
                                      ,       ,           ,       .
                                   ds      dρ          dr      dσ
Now permute, inter se, the variables of each system, as
                                  d d             d d
                                   , ;              , ,          &c.;
                                 dx dy            dp dt

the total number of the operative forms resulting will be (1 · 2)6 , and the sum of
the (1 · 2)6 quantities, half positive and half negative, formed after the type of
                     d d d       d d d      d d d        d d d
                                                                               
            Σ                U×          U×          U×          U ,
                    dx dϕ ds    dy dp dρ    dξ dθ dr    dη dt dσ
U being supposed to be a function homogeneous in

                         x, y;   ξ, η;    p, t;        ϕ, θ;    r, s;   ρ, σ,

will be a covariant of U .
   The proof of the truth of this proposition is contained in what is shown in the
Notes of the Appendix for total commutants, it being only necessary to make the
systems which are independent vary consecutively, and then apply the inference
to the supposition of their varying simultaneously.
   It may be extended to the more general supposition of classes of an unequal
number of cogredient systems of unequal numbers of variables in each, the only
condition apparently required being that the number of distinct terms shall be
the same in each line of the final commutantive operator. The important remark
to be made is, that in applying this theorem there is nothing to prevent any of
the systems being made identical; or, in other words, a given function of one
system of variables may be regarded as a function of as many different, although
coincident, sets as we may choose to suppose. Thus, suppose

                                 U = Ax2 + 2Bxy + Cy 2 ;

we may take the partial commutant formed of the two total commutant operators
                                           d            d
                                             ,            ,
                                          dx           dy
                                           d            d
                                             ,            ,
                                          dx           dy
                                                                                      p. 320


                                                  14
   combined with itself. If we write them in the same order,

                               d˙      d˙      d′     d′
                                  ,       ,       ,      ,
                              dx      dy       dx     dy
                               d˙      d˙      d′     d′
                                  ,       ,       ,      ,
                              dx      dy       dx     dy

(where I use the dots and dashes to distinguish those in the same line which are
considered as belonging to the same class, and therefore as permutable, inter se),
we shall evidently obtain 4{AC − B 2 }2 ; if we commence with a permutation, so
as to have the form of operation

                               d˙      d˙      d′     d′
                                  ,       ,       ,       ,
                              dx      dy       dx     dy
                               d˙     d′       d′      d˙
                                  ,       ,       ,       ,
                              dx      dy       dx     dy

it will be found that we obtain 2{AC − B 2 }2 .
   Again, suppose that we have

                      U = Ax3 + 3Bx2 y + 3Cxy 2 + Dy 3 .

If we write
                               d˙      d˙      d′     d′
                                  ,       ,       ,      ,
                              dx      dy       dx     dy
                               d˙      d˙      d′     d′
                                  ,       ,       ,      ,
                              dx      dy       dx     dy
                               d˙      d˙      d′     d′
                                  ,       ,       ,      ,
                              dx      dy       dx     dy
the value of the commutant would come out zero; but if we make a permutation,
and write
                             d˙   d˙   d′    d′
                                ,    ,    ,     ,
                            dx dy dx dy
                             d˙   d′   d′    d˙
                                ,    ,    ,     ,
                            dx dy dx dy
                             d˙   d˙   d˙    d′
                                ,    ,    ,     ,
                            dx dy dx dy
the operation indicated by the above performed upon U , will give a multiple of
the discriminant of U .                                                         p. 321
   In like manner we may represent Aronhold’s Sextic Invariant of the form




                                          15
(x, y, z)3 by means of the partial commutant

                            d˙        d˙           d˙      d′       d′       d′
                               ,         ,            ,       ,        ,        ,
                           dx        dy            dz      dx       dy       dz
                            d˙        d˙           d˙      d′       d′       d′
                               ,         ,            ,       ,        ,        ,
                           dx        dy            dz      dx       dy       dz
                            d˙        d˙           d˙      d′       d′       d′
                               ,         ,            ,       ,        ,        .
                           dx        dy            dz      dx       dy       dz
If we make
                                                                                       2
                   ′ d        ′ d            ′ d             d     d    d
                                                  
          V = ξ          +η         +ζ                    ξ    +η    +ζ                     (x, y, z)3 ,
                   dξ         dη             dζ             dx    dy    dz
and use H to signify the determinant

                                               x y z
                                               ξ η ζ ,
                                               ξ′ η′ ζ ′

which is evidently an universal triple covariant, and make

                                             W = V + λH,

and apply to W the partial commutantive symbol

                          d˙         d˙         d˙         d′        d′       d′
                              ,          ,          ,           ,        ,         ,
                         dx         dy         dz          dx       dy        dz
                          d          d          d          d′        d′       d′
                              ,          ,          ,           ,        ,         ,
                         dξ         dη         dζ          dξ       dη        dζ
                          d          d          d          d′        d′       d′
                              ,          ,          ,           ,        ,         ,
                         dξ ′       dη ′       dζ ′        dξ ′     dη ′      dζ ′
we shall obtain a function of λ of which all the odd powers and the second power
will disappear, and such that the coefficients of λ2 and the constant term will be
Aronhold’s S and T , and the discriminant of the entire function in respect to λ2
(if not for the distribution assigned to the dots and dashes in the foregoing, at
least for some other distribution) may not improbably be the discriminant of
the given function (x, y, z)3 .                                                    p. 322


                                    Notes in Appendix.

   (1) [p. 295 above.] More generally, in as many ways as the number n can be
divided into parts, in so many ways can a given function of one set of variables
be as it were unravelled so as to furnish concomitant forms.


                                                      16
   For instance, the form ax3 + 3bx2 y + 3cxy 2 + dy 3 has for a concomitant

                        aux + buy + bvx + cvy + cwx + dwy,

where u, v, w are cogredient with x2 , 2xy, y 2 ; and also

         auu′ x + buuy + buv ′ x + bvu′ x + cvv ′ x + cvu′ y + cuv ′ y + dvv ′ y,

where u, v; u′ , v ′ are cogredient with each other and with x and y; and the
proposition in the text may be best derived from this more general theorem by
dividing the index into equal parts, forming as many systems as there are such
parts, and then identifying the systems so formed.
   (2) [p. 297 above.] The following additional example will illustrate the power
of this method.
   Let ϕ = (x, y, z)4 be the general function of the fourth degree. Form by
unravelment the concomitant form (u, v, w, p, q, r)2 (say P ) where u, v, w, p, q, r
are cogredient with x2 , y 2 , z 2 , 2zy, 2xz, 2yx.
   Again, the universal concomitant (xξ + yη + zζ)2 will have for its concomitant

                        uξ 2 + vη 2 + wζ 2 + pηζ + qζξ + rξη,

where ξ, η, ζ are contragredient to x, y, z. Now take the reciprocal polar of this
last form with respect to ξ, η, ζ; that is,
                   1            1     1
                                                   
             Σ vw − p2 x21 + 2Σ   qr − pu y1 z1 ,                  (say G),
                   4            4     2
where x1 , y1 , z1 , being contragredient to ξ, η, ζ, will be cogredient with x, y, z. P +
λG is a quadratic function of the six variables u, v, w, p, q, r, and its discriminant
will give a function of λ of the sixth degree, all of whose even coefficients will
be covariants of ϕ. If we replace x1 , y1 , z1 by x, y, z, these even coefficients will
be respectively (understanding that order refers to the dimensions quoad the
coefficients of ϕ and degree to the dimensions quoad x, y, z) as follows:                  p. 323


                                Of order 6 degree 0,
                                   ”5        ”    2,
                                   ”4        ”    4,
                                   ”3        ”    6,
                                   ”2        ”    8,
                                   ”1        ”    10,
                                   ”0        ”    12.
The two last coefficients must evidently be identically zero. It is possible that
some of the others may be so too: as regards the one of the third order and
sixth degree, this is of the same form as, and may be identical with, the Hessian
of ϕ; as regards the one of the fourth order and fourth degree, this may be ϕ

                                            17
itself multiplied by the cubic invariant (which the theory of Section III. proves
to exist) of ϕ. But the covariants of the fifth order and second degree, and of the
second order and eighth degree, if they are not identically zero, and if the latter
is not ϕ2 (which a trial or two of some very simple cases will easily establish one
way or the other) are probably irreducible forms. The existence of a correlated
conic section to a curve of the fourth order, if established, would be particularly
interesting, and its geometrical meaning would well deserve being elicited.
   (3) [p. 303 above.] If any form (f ) of the degree n be written symbolically,
                              (a1 x1 + a2 x2 + · · · + aι xι )n ,
where x1 , x2 . . . xι are real but a1 , a2 . . . aι umbral, and if Ir be any invariant of
the order r in respect of the real coefficients of (f ), it is easily seen by reason of
Ir remaining unaltered when x1 , x2 . . . xι become respectively f1 x1 , f2 x2 . . . fι xι ,
provided that f1 , f2 . . . fι = 1, that each term in Ir expressed by means of the
umbræ, must contain an equal number of times a1 , a2 . . . aι , so that each such
term will contain nr  ι of each of them, of course differently subdivided and grouped;
hence we have the universal condition that nr          ι must be an integer; but this is
less stringent than the actual condition, which is that nr      ι must be an integer of a
certain form; for instance, as before observed, when ι = 2, nr           ι must be an even
integer.
    (4) [p. 307 above.] To prove the theorem given in the text for total simple
commutants it is only necessary to bear in mind that whenever two columns
in any total commutant become identical, the commutant vanishes. To fix the
                                                                d d d
ideas, take the commutant formed of lines similar to dx           , dy , dz , written        p. 324
    under one another; let there be r such lines, the total number of terms will
be (1 · 2 · 3)r : the 1 · 2 · 3 positions of the line written above will correspond to
(1 · 2 · 3)r−1 several groupings of the remaining lines. Now when x, y, z undergo
                                          d d d
a unimodular linear substitution, dx        , dy , dz will undergo a related substitution
not coincident with that of x, y, z, but still unimodular; let x, y, z change, all the
other systems remaining fixed, and suppose
                                        d      d       d
                                          ,      ,
                                       dx     dy       dz
to become respectively
         d     d   d                  d       d     d                   d         d      d
    f      +g    +h ,           f′      + g′    + h′ ,          f ′′      + g ′′    + h′′ ,
        dx    dy   dz                dx      dy     dz                 dx        dy      dz
then each of the (1 · 2 · 3)r−1 groups of the terms arising from the permutation of
 d d d
dx , dy , dz will subdivide into 27 groups, of which we may reject those in which
                               
                    d d d
any of the terms dx   , dy , dz occurs twice or three times; accordingly there will
be left only the six effective orders of permutations,
                     d       d     d                  d     d        d
                                                                      
                f      , g ′ , h′′    ;         f       , h′ , g ′′    ;      &c.
                    dx      dy     dz                dx     dz      dy

                                              18
consequently each of the (1 · 2 · 3)r−1 groups gives rise to 6 times 6 products
whose sum will be
             f ′′ g ′′ h′′
             f ′ g ′ h′      × the sum of the 6 products corresponding
             f g h

                           d d d
to the permutations of dx    , dy , dz ; and therefore, the transformations being
unimodular, the sum of the products corresponding to the entire (1 · 2 · 3)r
permutations remains constant when x, y, z change. In like manner, all the
systems may change one after the other, and consequently all of them at the
same time without affecting the value of the commutant: and in like manner for
the general case.                                                          Q.E.D.
   (5) [p. 312 above.] The truth of the proposition relative to compound commu-
tants and the mode of the demonstration will be apparent from the subjoined
example.
   Let the function be supposed to be

                    (ax + by)(a′ x′ + b′ y ′ )(αξ + βη)(α′ ξ ′ + β ′ η ′ ),
                                                                                             p. 325
   where x, y; x′ , y ′ are cogredient and ξ, η; ξ ′ , η ′ cogredient; the a, b, α, β, &c.
are of course mere umbræ. Now take the compound commutant

                                 aa′ , ab′ + a′ b, bb′ ,
                                 αα′ , αβ ′ + α′ β, ββ ′ .

Let x, y; x′ , y ′ undergo a linear substitution, and, accordingly,

                                a    become        f a + gb,
                                a′      ”          f a′ + gb′ ,
                                 b      ”          ha + kb,
                                b′      ”          ha′ + kb′ ,

f, g, h, k being of course actual and not umbral; then the above commutant will
be easily seen to decompose into 6 others, which will be equal to the original
commutant multiplied by the determinant

                                     f2     2f g  g2
                                     f h f k + gh gk
                                     h2     2hk   k2

which is equal to (f k − gh)3 , that is = 1.
   And so in general, which shows, as in the preceding note, that all the classes
of cogredient systems may be transformed successively one after the other, and
therefore simultaneously, without altering the value of the commutant.

                                              19
   (6) In the last May Number9 of the Journal, Mr Boole, to whose modest
labours the subject is perhaps at least as much indebted as to any one other
writer, has given a theorem10 , (14) p. 94, the excellent idea contained in which
there is no difficulty in shaping so as to render it generalizable by aid of the
theory of contravariants. It may be regarded in some sort a pendant or reciprocal
to the Eisenstein-Hermite theorem, presented by me under a wider aspect in the
First Section of this paper.                                                      p. 326
   Let ϕ(x, y . . . z) have any contravariant θ(x, y . . . z); then will
                                  d d      d
                                                   
                               ϕ   ,   ...              · θ(x, y . . . z)
                                 dx dy     dz
be a contravariant of ϕ. For orthogonal transformations the terms contravariant
and covariant coincide, and the theorem for this case appears to have been
known to Mr Boole, see (15), same page. More generally, if ψ and θ be any
two concomitants of ϕ, the algebraical product ψθ will also be a concomitant
of ϕ, provided that the systems of variables in ψ and θ have all distinct names,
or that those which bear the same names are cogredient with one another. If
this proviso does not hold good, the product in question will evidently be no
longer a concomitant of ϕ. Let however Ψ denote what ψ becomes, and ϑ what
θ becomes, when in place of the variables x, y . . . z of every two contragredient
synonymous systems in ψ and θ we write
                                           d d     d
                                            ,   ... ,
                                          dx dy    dz
then will ϑψ and Ψθ be each of them concomitants of ϕ, the synonymous systems
becoming cogredient with ψ in the one case and with θ in the other.
   (7) There is one principle of paramount importance which has not been
touched upon in the preceding pages, which I am very far from supposing to
exhaust the fundamental conceptions of the subject, (indeed, not to name other
points of enquiry, I have reason to suppose that the idea of contragredience itself
admits of indefinite extension through the medium of the reciprocal properties
of commutants; the particular kind of contragredience hereinbefore considered
having reference to the reciprocal properties of ordinary determinants only).
   9
    Camb. and Dub. Math. Journ. Vol. vi. (1851), pp. 87–106.
  10                                                                                4
    Mr Boole applied his theorem to obtain
                                            d      d
                                                      the cubic invariant of (x, y) , say ϕ(x,2n
                                                                                                y), by
operating upon its Hessian with ϕ dy          , − dx  . More generally, when ϕ(x, y) = (x, y) , the
catalecticant of the antepenultimate
                                           emanant of ϕ is also of the degree 2n; and this, when
                         d      d
operated upon by ϕ dy      , − dx   , will give an invariant of the order n + 1, which is probably
identical with the catalecticant of ϕ itself. There exists a most interesting transformation of the
catalecticant of any emanant of a function of any degree in x, y, whether even or odd, under the
form of a determinant some of the lines of which contain combinations only of x and y, without
any of the coefficients, and all the rest the coefficients only of the given function without x or y.
The Hessian being the catalecticant of the second emanant is of course included within this
statement.


                                                 20
   The principle now in question consists in introducing the idea of continuous
or infinitesimal variation into the theory. To fix the ideas, suppose C to be a
function of the coefficients of ϕ(x, y, z), such that it remains unaltered when
x, y, z become respectively f x, gy, hz, provided that f gh = 1. Next, suppose
that C does not alter when x becomes x + εy + ϵz, when ε and ϵ are indefinitely
small: it is easily and obviously demonstrable that if this be true for ε and ϵ
indefinitely small, it must be true for all values of ε and ϵ. Again, suppose that C
alters neither when x receives such an infinitesimal increment, y and z remaining
constant, nor when y nor z separately receive corresponding increments, z, x
and x, y in the respective cases remaining constant; it then follows from what
has been stated above that this remains true for finite increments to x or y or z
separately; and hence it may easily be shown that C will remain constant for
any concurrent linear transformations of x, y, z, when the modulus is unity. This
all-important principle enables
                                  us at once to fix the form of the symmetrical
                               x
functions of the roots of ϕ y , 1 which represent invariants of ϕ(x, y) when the
coefficient of the                                                                   p. 327
   highest power of x is made unity. It also instantaneously gives the neces-
sary and sufficient conditions to which an invariant of any given order of any
homogeneous function whatever is subject, and thereby reduces the problem of
discovering invariants to a definite form. But as these conditions coincide with
those which have been stated to me as derived from other considerations by the
gentleman whose labours in this department are concomitant with my own, I
feel myself bound to abstain from pressing my conclusions until he has given his
results to the press.
   (8) By aid of the general principle enunciated in Note (6) above, we can easily
obtain Aronhold’s S and T . Let U be the given cubic function of x, y, z, and let
G(x, y, z; ξ, η, ζ) be the polar reciprocal in respect to ξ, η, ζ of
                                    d     d    d
                                                     
                                 ξ    +η    +ζ    U,
                                   dx    dy    dz
then G(ξ, η, ζ; x, y, z) as well as the former G will be a concomitant to U , but
the homonymous systems of variables in the two G’s will be contragredient; and,
accordingly,
                        d d d d d d
                                            
                 G        , , ; , ,            · G(ξ, η, ζ; x, y, z)
                       dx dy dz dξ dη dζ
will be a concomitant to U ; this concomitant is readily seen to be an invariant
of the fourth order; that is, Aronhold’s S. Again, from S, by means of the
Eisenstein-Hermite theorem, we may derive a form K(x, y, z) of the third degree
in x, y, z, and whose coefficients will be of three dimensions; and, accordingly, if
the Hessian of U be called H(U ),
                                      d d d
                                               
                             K         , ,          · H(U )
                                     dx dy dz

                                          21
will be a Sextic Invariant of U , that is, Aronhold’s T .




                                        22
