Ernst Steinitz                                                                   Algebraic Theory of Fields


Algebraic Theory of Fields
                                     By Mr. Ernst Steinitz in Berlin.

In the present essay the concept “field” is taken in the same abstract and general manner as in H.
Weber’s investigations on the general foundations of Galois equation theory 1 , namely as a system
of elements with two operations, addition and multiplication, which are subject to the associative
and commutative laws, are connected by the distributive law, and admit unrestricted and unique
inverse operations2 . Whereas in Weber, however, the aim is a general treatment of Galois theory
independent of the numerical meaning of the elements, for us the concept of field itself stands at
the center of interest. To obtain a survey of all possible types of fields and to establish, in their
basic outlines, their relations to one another may be taken as the program of this work3 . Since
in this connection the distinctions belonging to arithmetic in the narrower sense between integral
and fractional quantities were not to be pursued further, the title Algebraic Theory of Fields was
chosen.
    The tendency just indicated also prescribes the path which we have to take. We shall begin
with the formation of the simplest fields and then consider the methods by which one passes from
a given field, by extension, to a more comprehensive one. The first task leads to the concept
of the prime field and to a distinction among fields according to their characteristic. In every
field there is contained a smallest field, or prime field; it is either of the type of the field of
rational numbers (characteristic 0) or of the type of the system of residue classes modulo a prime
number p (characteristic p). In many questions the characteristic is without significance; in
others, however, a deep difference appears between fields of characteristic 0 and those of prime
characteristic. An analogous distinction is prompted by the consideration of the so-called simple
extensions, which can be obtained by adjoining a single element. According as such an element
does or does not satisfy an algebraic equation over the ground field, it is called algebraic or
transcendental (with respect to the ground field). By an algebraic extension we mean, quite
generally, any extension all of whose elements are algebraic, whereas every other extension is
called transcendental. Among the algebraic extensions are the finite ones, characterized by the
fact that all elements of the extension field can be represented linearly and homogeneously, with
coefficients from the ground field, by means of a finite number of elements of the extension field.
In the literature, usually only these extensions are called algebraic. The investigations belonging
here form the content of Galois theory.
    Following the procedure of Cauchy, who showed that the introduction of the complex numbers
can be avoided by considerations of congruences modulo x2 + 14 , Kronecker proved that any
introduction of irrationalities in the treatment of algebraic problems5 can likewise be avoided
if one replaces equations by congruences modulo systems of moduli. We use the Kroneckerian
idea first of all to prove that, given a field K and a function φ(x) irreducible in K, one can find
an extension field which arises from K by adjoining a root of φ(x). In doing so, however, by
introducing a symbol through which we represent all elements of the extension field, and which
itself becomes a root of φ(x), we pass back from the notation of congruences to equations. The
further investigations are built synthetically upon this first result. The method followed here may
be regarded as just as purely arithmetical as the method of congruences, to which the transition
is of course always possible and, although sometimes inconvenient, by no means to be missed.
   1
     Math. Ann. 43, p. 521.
   2
     Only division by zero is to be excluded.
   3
     I was led to these general investigations especially by Hensel’s Theory of Algebraic Numbers (Leipzig, 1908),
in which the field of p-adic numbers forms the point of departure: a field which is to be counted neither among
function fields nor among number fields in the ordinary sense of the word.
   4
     Exerc. d’anal. et de phys. math. 4 (1847), p. 87.
   5
     For Kronecker it is always only a matter of problems requiring finite extensions.



                                                        1
Ernst Steinitz                                                                   Algebraic Theory of Fields


    From the domain of finite extensions, it is especially to be emphasized that Galois theory, as
we find it for algebraic number fields, does not exist in full scope for all fields. A large part of
that theory rests on the theorem that every equation with vanishing discriminant (multiple roots)
must be reducible. But precisely this theorem is not valid in general. This gives us occasion to
divide fields into perfect and imperfect ones. To the former belong all fields of characteristic 0;
among the fields of characteristic p, however, only those within which extraction of the p-th root
is possible without exception. I have gone somewhat further into the properties of imperfect
fields, with their laws partly diverging from ordinary Galois theory, than would have been strictly
necessary for the continuous investigation. The fields with only finitely many elements still
required special treatment. Although in them, as in all other perfect fields, the theorems of
Galois theory hold without restriction6 , the proof must nevertheless be shaped partly differently.
    Under the title “a fundamental theorem of general arithmetic” Kronecker published in this
journal a paper7 which deals with determining a prime modulus system for which a given
polynomial in one variable can be represented as a product of linear factors. That the existence
of such a prime modulus system is of fundamental importance for general arithmetic is beyond
question; the reference to the fundamental theorem of algebra, [by which Kronecker justifies
calling his theorem a fundamental theorem, does not appear quite apt. The fundamental theorem
of algebra gives more: in the domain of general arithmetic, the corresponding statement would
be the proof of a prime modulus system for which every function of the rationality domain under
consideration decomposes into linear factors. The treatment of this problem lay outside the
circle of Kronecker’s investigations insofar as its solution requires the introduction of infinitely
many indeterminates. If we translate the problem into our manner of speaking, it is a question
of extending a given field to an algebraically closed one, that is, to a field in which every
polynomial in one indeterminate decomposes into linear factors. This task belongs to the domain
of infinite algebraic extensions; in § 16 it will first be solved for the case of a prime field of
prime characteristic. The method used there is also applicable in other cases, for instance in the
natural rationality domains considered by Kronecker alone; it requires no appeal to principles
which would not be acknowledged by all mathematicians. Matters stand otherwise with the
proof that our problem, if one further requires that the extension field contain no superfluous
elements, has essentially8 only one solution. This proof cannot be carried out even for the field of
rational numbers, for example, without use of the principle of choice. This principle also appears
unavoidable if one wants to prove the existence of an algebraically closed extension for every
arbitrary field. The well-ordering theorem of Zermelo, resting on the principle of choice, forms an
essential auxiliary means for this proof9 . — Many mathematicians still stand opposed to the
principle of choice. With the increasing recognition that there are questions in mathematics which
cannot be decided without this principle, resistance to it should diminish more and more. On
the other hand, in the interest of purity of method it appears appropriate to avoid the principle
named as far as the nature of the question does not require its use. I have endeavored to make
this boundary stand out sharply.
    This also applies to the discussions of the last section, which deals with transcendental
extensions. Among them the simplest appear to be the purely transcendental ones. A purely
transcendental extension amounts essentially to the adjunction of indeterminates, which may form
a finite or also an infinite set of arbitrary cardinality. The well-ordering theorem leads immediately
to the recognition that every extension can be decomposed into a purely transcendental and an
algebraic one.
   6
     This also holds, for example, with respect to the questions settled by Weber for fields with infinitely many
elements, but left open for finite fields; see the conclusion of the cited work.
   7
     Vol. 100, p. 490. = Works III, I, p. 209.
   8
     For the precise explanation of this expression, see § 5.
   9
     The first application of the well-ordering theorem to an arithmetical problem is found, to my knowledge, in
Hamel, Mathem. Ann. 60, p. 459.



                                                       2
Ernst Steinitz                                                                      Algebraic Theory of Fields


    From here it is easy to characterize the position which the fields considered by Kronecker
occupy within the totality of fields. In Kronecker, the concept of field develops in three stages10 .
The point of departure is the “absolute rationality domain,” that is, the field of rational numbers,
hence a particular prime field. From it one arrives, by adjoining a finite number of indeterminates,
hence by a special purely transcendental extension, at the “natural rationality domain”; from
this, finally, by adjoining an algebraic quantity, that is, by a special algebraic extension, at the
“genus domain.” — If, instead, one starts from an arbitrary prime field, undertakes an arbitrary
purely transcendental extension and then an arbitrary algebraic extension, one thereby has a
procedure by which one can arrive at every field.
    The present essay treats only the basic outlines of a general theory of fields. I intend to let
more extensive investigations, as well as applications to geometry, number theory, and the theory
of functions, follow in several further papers.




Overview of contents: I. Foundations (§§ 1–6); II. Algebraic extensions (§§ 7–15); III. Infinite
algebraic extensions (§§ 16–21); IV. Transcendental extensions (§§ 22–24). — (Detailed table of
contents at the end of the work.)

                                                         § 1.
                     Systems with double composition. Isomorphism. Fields.

     If S denotes a system of elements, then by a law of composition of the system S we mean
any specification by which to each pair a, b of elements of this system, which may also be equal,
an element c of the same system is assigned. — By a system with double composition we mean
one for which two laws of composition are given, which we call addition and multiplication. By
addition, to every two elements a, b their sum a + b is assigned; by multiplication, their product
a · b is assigned.
    Isomorphism. Two systems S1 , S2 with double composition are called isomorphic or of the
same (composition-) type if it is possible to put their elements into a one-to-one correspondence in
such a way that, to the sum and the product of any two elements of one system, there are always
assigned in the other the sum and the product of the corresponding elements; the correspondence
itself is called an isomorphic one, or an isomorphism.
    Fields. — Up to now we have subjected the two laws of composition to no further condition
than that of uniqueness. If we introduce further conditions, we arrive at special kinds of systems
with double composition. Among these, the rationality domains (Kronecker) or fields (Dedekind)
are of particular importance: systems satisfying the following 7 conditions:

  1. The associative law of addition:

                                               (a + b) + c = a + (b + c),

  2. the commutative law of addition:
                                                      a + b = b + a,

  3. the associative law of multiplication:

                                                  (a · b) · c = a · (b · c),
  10
       Festschrift for Kummer’s doctoral jubilee, §§ 1–3. This journal, vol. 92, p. 1. = Works II, p. 237.



                                                           3
Ernst Steinitz                                                                    Algebraic Theory of Fields


  4. the commutative law of multiplication:
                                                   a · b = b · a,

  5. the distributive law:
                                              a(b + c) = ab + ac,

  6. the law of unrestricted and unique subtraction:

    If a, b are elements of the system, then in it there is one and only one element x for which
a + x = b. — Let this element be denoted by b − a and called the difference of a and b, so that
in general
                                          a + (b − a) = b
holds.
     Before setting out the seventh and last condition, we draw from the preceding ones a few
simple consequences. Let a, b be any two elements of our system. If we put a − a = x, b − b = y,
then, by 6., the equations a + x = a, b = b + y hold; and when we add them, then by applying
1. and 2. we obtain (a + b) + x = (a + b) + y, and from this by 6. x = y, or a − a = b − b.
Thus there is a distinguished element — we call it zero (0) — which is represented by every
difference of the form a − a. — If again a, b denote arbitrary elements of the system, then
a · b = a(b + 0) = a · b + a · 0, whence a · 0 = a · b − a · b = 0, i.e. a product in which one factor is
0 is itself 0. — We now let the last condition follow:

  7. the law of unrestricted and unique division:

   The system contains, besides 0, at least one further element; and if a is an element different
from 0 and b is any element of the system, then in it there is one and only one element x for
which a · x = b. — We call x the quotient of b by a, in symbols x = ab or x = b : a.
    If all 7 conditions are satisfied, the system is called a field. Examples of fields are the systems
of rational, real, complex numbers, and so forth. The significance of the stated conditions rests
on the fact that all laws prevailing in the named fields, insofar as they can be expressed by
equations between aggregates built up rationally from their elements, appear as consequences of
those conditions and therefore recur in all fields. Without carrying this out in every detail, we
will nevertheless emphasize here some of the essential points: if a, b are two non-zero elements of
a field K, then by 7. a · b is different from a · 0 = 0; that is, a product is equal to 0 only when at
least one fac- tor vanishes. — If a and b are different from 0, and one determines x and y by the
conditions a · x = a, b · y = b, then (ab)x = b(ax) = ba = (by)a = (ab)y, (ab)x = (ab)y, hence
by 7. x = y. If we therefore denote the solution of the equation ax = a by ε, then ε, as the
unique element of K, has the property that, multiplied by any element of K, it leaves that element
unchanged, and it is represented by every quotient of the form aa (a =       ̸ 0). This distinguished
element we call the unit; we shall always denote it by ε.
    Among the theorems whose proof can be conducted solely on the basis of the 7 stated
conditions are also the fundamental theorems from determinant theory. In particular, for every
field K the following holds:

  1) n linear equations with n unknowns
                                     n
                                     X
                                           aik xk = ci ,     (i = 1, . . . , n)
                                     k=1

     in which the coefficients aik , ci are given elements of K, have, if the determinant |aik | is not
     0, one and only one system of solutions in K.

                                                      4
Ernst Steinitz                                                                    Algebraic Theory of Fields


  2) n homogeneous linear equations with n + 1 unknowns
                                        n
                                        X
                                              aik xk = 0     (i = 1, . . . , n)
                                        k=0

     have at least one system of solutions whose elements are not all 0.

   Finally, at this point let it also be noted that there are fields which possess only a finite
number of elements. Thus the p residue classes modulo a prime number p form a system with
double composition which satisfies all 7 conditions, hence is a field in our sense.

                                                      § 2.
                                  Subfields, extension, adjunction.

    A subsystem K′ of a field K can, by means of the laws of composition prevailing in K, itself
represent a field. It is plainly necessary and sufficient for this that, whenever α and β are elements
of K′ , also α + β, α − β, α · β and, if β ̸= 0, αβ belong to K′ . We then say: the field K contains
the field K′ , K′ is contained in K; and we call K′ a subfield of K, and K an extension field or
extension of K′ . As a rule, among the subfields and extension fields of a field we shall count
the field itself; where this is not the case, it will be apparent from the expression used (“proper
extension,” “proper subfield,” “only a subfield”) or from the context. — One now immediately
verifies the validity of the following theorem:
    1. If S denotes a system of finitely or infinitely many subfields of a field K, then in K there
are elements (for example 0, ε) which occur in all fields of the system S. The totality of these
elements again constitutes a field.
   We shall call this field the intersection of the field-system S. — Alongside Theorem 1 there
stands a second theorem, no less important:
     2. If U denotes a system of finitely or infinitely many fields with the property that any two
fields K1 , K2 from U are always contained in at least one field K3 of the system U, then there is a
definite field K (not necessarily occurring in U) which has all fields of the system U as subfields
and contains no elements other than those which occur in fields of U.
    Proof: Let K denote the system of all elements which occur in fields of the system U. Suppose
one has a finite number of elements a1 , a2 , . . . , an from K, and that Ki (i = 1, . . . , n) is a field from
U which contains ai . Then in U there is a field K′2 containing K1 and K2 , a field K′3 containing K′2
and K3 , and so forth. Thus there are fields in U which contain all the fields Ki (i = 1, . . . , n) and
therefore all the elements ai . If now a, b are any two elements from K, and K′ is any field from U
which contains a and b, then a + b and a · b have in K′ a definite meaning. If K′′ is any other field
belonging to U and containing a and b, then a + b and a · b likewise have in it a definite meaning.
But that a + b and a · b can designate in K′′ nothing other than they do in K′ is a consequence
of the assumption that there is a field containing K′ and K′′ . Thus the sum and product of
two elements from K are unambiguously defined, i.e. K is a system with double composition.
From the circumstance that every two elements from K occur simultaneously in fields from U, it
follows now that composition laws 2. and 4. of § 1 hold; further, that at least one element x1 ,
and, if a ̸= 0, at least one element x2 , occurs in K for which a + x1 = b, a · x2 = b. Since three
elements from K also occur in a field from U, it follows that composition laws 1., 3., and 5. are
also satisfied. Finally, since the same also holds for 4 elements a, b, x, y from K, the equations
a + x = b, a + y = b and, if a =  ̸ 0, also the equations a · x = b, a · y = b, can hold only when
x = y. The system K is therefore a field, and it is immediately evident that K contains all fields
from U and possesses only such elements as occur in the fields from U; and likewise that a field
possessing these two properties must necessarily be identical with K.

                                                       5
Ernst Steinitz                                                                  Algebraic Theory of Fields


    If the field K is contained in the field Ω, and S is any system of elements from Ω, then by
K(S) we denote the intersection of all those fields between11 K and Ω which contain all elements
of the system S. Of the field K(S) we say that it has arisen from K by adjunction of the system
S. The field K(S) can be equal to Ω, and is, for example, equal to Ω when S = Ω. But K(S)
can also be equal to K; this case occurs when all elements of S belong to K. If from a field K, by
adjunction of a system S1 , there arises a second field, and from this, by adjunction of a system
S2 , a third, and so forth, then, if S1 , S2 , . . . , Sn have been adjoined successively, we denote the
last field obtained by K(S1 , S2 , . . . , Sn ). As is easily seen, the final result does not depend on the
order of the systems S. — Suppose that from a field K, by adjunction of a system S of infinitely
many elements, the field K(S) arises. Let U denote the system of those fields which arise from
K by adjunction of one finite subsystem of S at a time. Then all fields from U are contained
in K(S). If K1 , K2 are any two fields from U, then K1 = K(S1 ), K2 = K(S2 ), where S1 , S2 are
finite subsystems of S. If S3 denotes that subsystem of S which contains all elements from S1
and S2 , but no other element, then S3 is also finite; the field K3 = K(S3 ), which contains K1
and K2 , therefore also belongs to U. Thus the system U satisfies the hypothesis of Theorem 2;
hence there exists a definite field Ω which contains all fields of the system U, therefore also K
and all elements from S, hence also K(S), but which also contains only such elements as occur
in fields of the system U. Since, however, all these elements already occur in K(S), the field in
question is identical with K(S). We therefore obtain the theorem:
    3. If S is an infinite system, then every element of the field K(S) — and likewise every
system of finitely many elements from K(S) — occurs in a field which arises from K by adjunction
of a finite subsystem of S.

                                                          § 3.
                                                Integral domains.

   By an integral domain we shall here mean a system with double composition which satisfies
conditions 1. through 6. of § 1, does not consist only of the single element 0, possesses a unit,
and in which the product of two elements different from 0 is always again different from 0. By a
unit is meant here an element ε for which the equation xε = x is satisfied by all elements of the
system; it is immediately seen that no more than one unit can exist.
    Every field is at the same time an integral domain, whereas the system of integers proves
that not every integral domain is a field. — The considerations made in § 2 about fields extend
without further ado to integral domains. A subsystem J′ of an integral domain J represents an
integral domain if it contains the unit, and if the sum, difference, and product of two elements
from J′ always again belong to J′ . Theorems 1. and 2. of § 2 also hold for integral domains,
as one immediately sees; in them one has only to replace the word (sub-)field everywhere by
(sub-)integral domain. Adjunction for integral domains we denote by square brackets, so that
J[S] represents an integral domain J which contains the integral domain J and the system of
elements S, and is so constituted that S is not already contained in an integral domain different
from J and lying between J and J = J[S]. If J is a field, then according to this one must
distinguish between J[S] and J(S). — Now, as is immediately evident, Theorem 3 of § 2 can
also be extended to integral domains.
    If a and b are elements of an integral domain J, we say: b is divisible by a, a goes into b, is a
divisor of b, and so forth, if in J there is an element x for which the equation ax = b is satisfied.
If b and c are divisible by a, then the same holds for b + c, b − c, and for b · d, where d is any
element from J. The concept of divisibility is, however, a relative one, depending on the integral
domain under consideration: if the element b is not divisible by a in J, it may nevertheless
become divisible by a in an enlarged domain.
  11
       A field lies “between” K and Ω if it contains K and is contained in Ω.


                                                           6
Ernst Steinitz                                                                Algebraic Theory of Fields


    Formation of quotients: — Let an integral domain J be contained in a field Ω. If by the
individual letters we denote elements from J, then in Ω, according to the laws holding for every
field, we have:
                                      ′   ′
  1) if one of the equations a = ab′ , ab′ = a, ab′ = a′ holds, then the other two also hold,
                  ′
  2) from ab = ab′ follows ab′ = a′ b, and conversely,
       a a′    ab′ + a′ b a a′    aa′
  3)     + ′ =           ,  ·   =     ,
       b  b       bb′      b b′   bb′
       a a′    ab′ − a′ b a a′    ab′
  4)     − ′ =           ,  :   =      .
       b  b       bb′      b b′   a′ b

     Of course it is assumed here that the denominators are different from 0, while otherwise the
letters denote arbitrary elements from J. From 3) and 4) it is seen that those elements of Ω which
can be represented as quotients of elements from J form a field K; from 1) — since according to it
a
 ε = a — it is seen that K contains the integral domain J. We say: K arises from J by formation
of quotients. Such a field must therefore exist as soon as J can be contained at all in a field Ω.
To test this possibility, one therefore only has to investigate whether it is legitimate to define, for
expressions of the form ab , the concepts equality, sum, product by 1), 2), and 3), and whether in
this way one arrives at a field containing J. That this is in fact the case for every integral domain
J is easily seen. If, for example, we examine the definition of equality, then from the assumption
a     a′ a′     a′′
 b = b′ , b′ = b′′ , there result by 2) the equations ab = a b, a b = a b ; from these, according
                                                            ′       ′   ′ ′′   ′′ ′

to the laws valid in J, by multiplication, ab a b = a ba b , hence, since b′ =
                                                  ′ ′ ′′      ′  ′′   ′              ̸ 0, ab′′ a′ = a′′ ba′ ,
and, if a′ ̸= 0, ab′′ = a′′ b. If, however, a′ = 0, then from ab′ = a′ b, a′ b′′ = a′′ b′ , b =
                                                                                              ̸ 0, b′ ̸= 0, it
                                                                                                             ′
follows that a = 0, a = 0, and hence again that ab = a b. In every case it follows from ab = ab′ ,
                          ′′                             ′′     ′′
a′     a′′                   a′′
 b′ = b′′ that also b = b′′ ; and the corresponding assertion holds, on the basis of 1), also when
                      a

one considers not 3 quotients but perhaps only two and a single element from J, and so forth.
                        ′                                                    ′
Further, from ab = ab′ it follows, on the basis of 2), that conversely ab′ = ab . Finally, by 2), always
a
 b = b . As far as the definitions of sum and product are concerned, one has to prove that they
      a

are unambiguous, i.e. that the result is not changed when one summand or factor is replaced by
one equal to it. Once this has been done, it is proved that a system with double composition is
present, and it remains to show that all 7 conditions stated in § 1 are satisfied. On the basis of
1), the field then contains the integral domain J. — All these investigations are disposed of in a
manner similar to the proof of the legitimacy of the definition of equality given by 1) and 2), and
it is therefore unnecessary to enter more closely into the details of the proof.
    The field K which arises from J by formation of quotients is, of course, identical with J if J
is a field. This case always occurs when J contains only finitely many, say m, elements. For if
then a (̸= 0) and b are elements of J, then as x runs through all m elements of J, so too does ax;
hence it is once equal to b, i.e. condition 7 of § 1 is satisfied, and J is a field. — From isomorphic
integral domains there arise, by formation of quotients, isomorphic fields, as is immediately
evident.

                                                     § 4.
                                    Prime fields. Characteristic.

   In order to gain an insight into the various possible types of fields, we must first start from
the formation of the simplest fields, and then investigate how, from fields once present, new ones
can be derived by extension. The first task leads to the concept of the prime field. By this we
understand a field which has no subfield apart from itself. The following theorem holds:
    1. In every field K there is contained one and only one prime field.

                                                      7
Ernst Steinitz                                                           Algebraic Theory of Fields


    Namely, let U denote the system of all subfields of K, and P their intersection. P is itself
a field belonging to U; and if P′ is a subfield of P, then P′ likewise belongs to U, hence must
contain P, and therefore is identical with P. Thus P is a prime field. Conversely, if T is a
subfield of K, then P is a subfield of T; if therefore T is to be a prime field, T must be identical
with P.
   In the same way we define, as a prime integral domain, one which contains no integral domain
apart from itself. The intersection of all integral domains contained in an integral domain J
represents the unique prime integral domain contained in J.
   Let K now be a system which for the time being we shall assume only to be an integral
domain, and let α be an element of K. We put
                           α = 1α,    α + α = 2α,     2α + α = 3α, . . . ,
where 1, 2, 3, . . . are to be understood as abbreviating symbols, but not as elements of K. The
elements α, 2α, 3α, . . . are called the natural multiples of α. If, further, −n denotes a negative
integer, we put
                                           −(nα) = (−n)α.
By this, for every integer m the element mα is defined. The elements mα are called the integral
multiples of α. For α = ε, if m, m′ denote integers, the equations
          mε + m′ ε = (m + m′ )ε,     mε − m′ ε = (m − m′ )ε,     (mε) · (m′ ε) = (mm′ )ε       (1.)
result at once; from them it follows that the integral multiples of ε form an integral domain
J. Since every integral domain contained in K contains the unit ε, and hence also the integral
multiples of ε, J represents the prime integral domain contained in K. If K is a field and P is
the prime field contained in K, then P contains all elements of J, and hence also all quotients of
elements of J. But since these already form a field, the prime field P is exhausted by them.
    Two cases are now conceivable: either the integral multiples of ε are all distinct from one
another, i.e. mε = m′ ε only when m = m′ , or that equation can also hold without this being
so. In the first case one has a one-to-one correspondence between J and the system of integers,
which by (1.) proves to be an isomorphism. If K is a field, it follows further from this that the
prime field P contained in K is isomorphic to the field of rational numbers. In the second case
there are natural multiples of ε which are equal to 0. If p is the smallest natural number for
which p · ε = 0, and if m, m′ are natural numbers < p, then from mε = ̸ 0, m′ ε ̸= 0 it follows that
(mm′ )ε = (mε) · (m′ ε) ̸= 0 = pε, and hence mm′ ̸= p. Thus p is not the product of any two
smaller numbers, and is therefore prime. We call p the characteristic of K, while in the case first
discussed we assign characteristic 0 to K. Accordingly every integral domain has a characteristic,
which is either 0 or a prime number. If the characteristic is a prime number p, it further follows
that mε = m′ ε holds if and only if m ≡ m′ (mod p). In connection with equations (1.), this
shows that here the prime integral domain J is isomorphic to the system of residue classes modulo
the prime number p; and since this system is already a field, here J = P. Thus we obtain:
   2. The only prime fields which exist are the fields of the type of the field of rational numbers
(which from now on we denote by P0 ) and those of the type of the residue-class system modulo a
prime number p (from now on denoted by Pp ).
   From the preceding it follows further:
   3. All subfields of a field K have the same characteristic as K.
  If α is any element of a field K, and m is an integer, then mα = (mε) · α; thus, if α ̸= 0, then
mα is equal to 0 only when mε = 0. Hence:
    4. An integral multiple mα of a non-zero element α in the field K is equal to 0 if and only
if either m = 0, or the characteristic of K is a prime number and m is divisible by this prime
number.

                                                 8
Ernst Steinitz                                                                Algebraic Theory of Fields


   Of course these theorems also hold for integral domains.

                                                   § 5.
Equivalent extensions. Simple extensions. Transcendental and algebraic elements.
    Adjunction of a transcendental element. Integral and rational functions.

    If Ω and Ω′ are extension fields of a field K, we say that Ω and Ω′ represent equivalent
extensions of K if Ω and Ω′ can be mapped isomorphically onto one another in such a way that
every element of K corresponds to itself. Thus the equivalence of two extensions Ω, Ω′ presupposes
an isomorphism; but non-equivalent extensions of a field may very well give isomorphic fields. —
If the problem is to extend a field so that the newly arisen field satisfies certain conditions, and if
it turns out that all extensions satisfying the imposed conditions are equivalent, then we say that
the extension problem has essentially only one solution. In this sense, for example, the problem of
extending the field R of real numbers so that every element of the new field satisfies an algebraic
equation in R, but not every element is already contained in R, is solvable in essentially only
one way.
   The simplest extensions of a field K are those which arise from K by adjoining a single element.
We call these simple extensions, and, if Ω is such an extension, we call every element α of Ω for
which K(α) = Ω a primitive element of Ω relative to K. — Let the field K(x) arise by adjoining
an element x from Ω. Between K and K(x) lies the integral domain K[x] (§ 3). It contains all
elements of the form
                                  c0 + c1 x + c2 x2 + · · · + cn xn ,
where the coefficients c are arbitrary elements of K. For more convenient notation we think of
the named elements of K[x] as written in the form of infinite series
                                            X
                                               ck xk ,                                    (1.)

where of course it is always assumed that from some index k on all coefficients are equal to 0.
Then the equations
          X             X          X
               ak xk +     bk xk =   (ak + bk )xk ,
            X           X        X                                                     (2.)
                 ak xk       bk xk =     ck xk , ck = a0 bk + a1 bk−1 + · · · + ak b0 ,

and                            X             X             X
                                   ak xk −       bk xk =       (ak − bk )xk                         (3.)
hold. They show that the elements of the form (1.) reproduce themselves under addition,
subtraction, and multiplication. Since all elements of K, in particular also ε, are among the
elements of the form (1.), these elements form an integral domain containing K; and since it
also contains x, it must be identical with K[x]. The field K(x) contains the integral domain
K[x], hence also a definite field L arising from K[x] by formation of quotients (§ 3). But since L
contains both K and x, K(x) is identical with L.
    As in the formation of the simplest fields, so also in the formation of the simplest extensions
we
P have     to
           P distinguish  two cases. The first corresponds to the assumption that two elements
   ak xk ,    bk xk of K[x] are equal only when ak = bk for every k; the second is the contrary
case. In the first case we call the element x transcendental, in the second algebraic relative to
K. We shall also introduce here some further terminology that will be important later. If Ω is
any extension field of K, then n elements α1 , . . . , αn of Ω are called linearly dependent or linearly
independent relative to K according as a homogeneous linear relation

                                       a0 α0 + · · · + an αn = 0,

                                                    9
Ernst Steinitz                                                           Algebraic Theory of Fields


in which the coefficients a are elements of K and are not all equal to 0, exists or does not exist.
The elements α1 , . . . , αn need not all be distinct from one another; but it is clear that if equal
ones occur among them, they are always linearly dependent. We also note that the elements
α1 , . . . , αn are linearly dependent if even a part of them is linearly dependent. On this basis
we arrive at an extension of our definition to systems of infinitely many elements. A system
S of infinitely many elements from Ω is called linearly dependent or independent relative to K
according as there exists, or does not exist, a finite subsystem of S which is linearly dependent
relative to K. The distinction made above between (relatively) transcendental and algebraic
elements can now also be formulated as follows: The element x is transcendental or algebraic
relative to K according as its powers

                                         ε, x, x2 , . . . , xn , . . .

are linearly independent or dependent relative to K.
   We first consider the adjunction of a transcendental element, which alone will be treated in
the present section. Here the following holds.
   1. Every field K can be extended by adjoining a transcendental element x.
    Namely, usingP the elements
                              P ofk K we form all expressions of the form (1.), stipulate that two
such expressions      ak xk ,  bk x are to count as equal only when ak = bk for every k, and set
equations (2.) as definitions for addition and multiplication. We have thereby created a system
with double composition containing K,Pwhich, as directP       calculation immediately gives, satisfies
conditions 1.–6. of § 1. Further, if α = ak xk and β = bk xk are two non-zero elementsP        of this
system, and if am , bn are the last coefficients different from 0, then in the product αβ = ck xk
the coefficient cm+n = am · bn ̸= 0, hence αβ ̸= 0. Since the system also contains a unit, it is
an integral domain J, and since all elements of J are formed from x and the elements of K by
addition and multiplication, J = K[x]. From J, however, as from every integral domain, one
obtains by formation of quotients a field, the field K(x).
   2. All extensions of a field which arise by adjoining a transcendental element are equivalent.
    For if K(x) and K(y) are two such extensions, and to every element of K(x), thought of as
represented in the form of a quotient of two elements of the form (1.), one assigns that element
of K(y) which is obtained by replacing x by y, then it is easy to see that one has an isomorphic
relation between K(x) and K(y) in which every element of K corresponds to itself.
   The elements of the field K(x) are also called rational functions; the elements of the integral
domain K[x] are called integral functions of the transcendental or indeterminate x in the field K.
For their notation we use, in the usual way, function symbols f (x), g(x), and so on. An integral
function
                                  f (x) = c0 + c1 x + · · · + cn xn
is said to be of degree n if cn ̸= 0; thus the integral functions of degree 0 are represented by the
non-zero elements of K. We assign no degree to the element 0; however, if it is asserted of an
integral function that its degree lies below a certain bound, the case that the function is equal to
0 is always to be included.
   If f (x) and g(x) are integral functions of the indeterminate x in the field K, with g(x) ̸= 0
and n the degree of g(x), then by the familiar division process in the field K one can determine
two integral functions q(x) and r(x) such that, first,

                                     f (x) = q(x) · g(x) + r(x)                                   (4.)

and, second, the degree of r(x) is < n. The functions q(x) and r(x) are uniquely determined
by these two requirements. The equation r(x) = 0 says that f (x) is divisible by g(x). It may
also happen that each of the functions f (x), g(x) is divisible by the other; then they differ

                                                     10
Ernst Steinitz                                                            Algebraic Theory of Fields


only by a factor of degree 0, hence by an element of K. In all questions concerning divisibility,
two such functions are to be regarded as essentially equal. The unique determination of the
functions q(x), r(x) occurring in (4.) is the reason that, for these questions, unlike the questions
of irreducibility treated later, it is immaterial in which field K the functions are considered; it
need only be a field to which the coefficients of the functions belong as elements, while x is
transcendental relative to it. — This also applies to the question of the greatest common divisor
t(x) of two integral functions f (x), g(x), in which every common divisor of f (x) and g(x) is
contained. The function t(x) is equal to 0 if f (x) = 0, g(x) = 0; otherwise it is different from
0 and determined only up to a factor of degree 0. To fix t(x) uniquely, we stipulate that the
coefficient of the highest power of x shall be the unit, and we denote the greatest common divisor
t(x) of f (x) and g(x) so determined by
                                             (f (x), g(x)).

   Euclid’s procedure teaches how to find t(x) and how to represent it in the form
                                 t(x) = f (x) · g1 (x) + g(x) · f1 (x).                           (5.)
The integral functions f1 (x), g1 (x) occurring here are uniquely determined if it is required that
their degrees be respectively smaller than the degrees of f (x) and g(x); like t(x), they belong to
every field to which the functions f (x), g(x) belong. The equation
                                          (f (x), g(x)) = ε
expresses that f (x) and g(x) are coprime.
   From Euclid’s algorithm one proceeds, in the usual way, to the further propositions:
   3. If f (x) is coprime to g(x) and f (x) · h(x) is divisible by g(x), then h(x) is divisible by
g(x).
   4. If f (x) and h(x) are coprime to g(x), then f (x) · h(x) is also coprime to g(x).
    Let the field K be extended by adjoining a transcendental element x to K(x). Every element ξ
of K(x) can then be represented in infinitely many ways as a quotient of two elements f (x), g(x)
of K[x]. By cancelling by the greatest common divisor one can arrange that numerator and
denominator are coprime; then by multiplying numerator and denominator by an element of K
one can arrange that in the denominator the coefficient of the highest power is equal to ε. In
this way we obtain a “reduced” representation of ξ, and there is only one such representation.
Indeed, suppose two reduced representations of ξ are given,
                                              f (x)   f1 (x)
                                         ξ=         =        .
                                              g(x)    g1 (x)
Then it follows that
                                    f (x) · g1 (x) = f1 (x) · g(x).
Since g(x) is coprime to f (x), but divides the product f (x) · g1 (x), it follows that g(x) must
divide g1 (x). Likewise g1 (x) must divide g(x); and since both functions have ε as the coefficient
of the highest power, we get g(x) = g1 (x), f (x) · g(x) = f1 (x) · g(x), hence also f (x) = f1 (x). —
Let again ξ = fg(x)
                 (x)
                     denote the reduced representation of the element ξ of K(x). Assume that ξ is
algebraic relative to K. Then there is a relation of the form
                                     c0 + c1 ξ + · · · + cn ξ n = 0,                              (6.)
where the coefficients c belong to the field K and where we may suppose cn ̸= 0. If ξ =     ̸ 0, we
may also suppose c0 ̸= 0. For if cµ is the first coefficient different from 0, then (6.) implies the
equation
                                 cµ + cµ+1 ξ + · · · + cn ξ n−µ = 0,

                                                   11
Ernst Steinitz                                                                                Algebraic Theory of Fields


in which again the term free of ξ is non-zero. Thus, assuming at once that c0 ̸= 0, and multiplying
(6.) by (g(x))n , we obtain an equation to which we can give the forms
                                                               
                     g(x) c0 (g(x))n−1 + · · · + cn−1 (f (x))n−1 = −cn (f (x))n ,
                                                                             
                      −c0 (g(x))n = f (x) c1 (g(x))n−1 + · · · + cn (f (x))n−1 .
From these it is clear that (f (x))n is divisible by g(x) and (g(x))n by f (x). But since f (x) and
g(x) are coprime, by 4. this is possible only when f (x) and g(x) have degree 0, hence when ξ is
an element of the field K. Thus we have the theorem:
    5. In the field K(x), which arises from K by adjoining a transcendental element x, all elements
except those of K itself are transcendental relative to K.
   This theorem, which has its counterpart in Theorem 3 of § 6, shows that the extensions
obtained by adjoining a transcendental element are quite different from those supplied by adjoining
an algebraic element.
    In the field K(x), which arises from K by adjoining the transcendental element x, all elements
are rational functions of x, or of course also of any other primitive element; by contrast, the
distinction of the elements of K(x) into integral and fractional depends on a particular element
x. A concept independent of the choice of primitive element is, as will still be shown, the degree
of a rational function R(x). If R(x) = fg(x)
                                          (x)
                                              is the representation of R(x) in reduced form, and if
m and n are the degrees of f (x) and g(x), then the degree of the rational function R(x) is the
larger of the numbers m and n, and, if they are equal, the common number m = n. We prove:
   6. A rational function of degree n of a rational function of degree ν (n > 0, ν > 0) is a
function of degree n · ν.
   Let, in reduced representation,
                                                  f (x)                          φ(x)
                                    R(x) =              ,           P (x) =                                         (7.)
                                                  g(x)                           ψ(x)
be rational functions of x in the field K, and let n and ν be their degrees,
                   (
                     f (x) = a0 xn + · · · + an ,   g(x) = b0 xn + · · · + bn ,
                                                                                                                    (8.)
                     φ(x) = α0 xν + · · · + αν ,    ψ(x) = β0 xν + · · · + βν .

Then neither the elements a0 , b0 nor the elements α0 , β0 can vanish simultaneously. Since f (x)
and g(x) are coprime, two integral functions f1 (x), g1 (x) of degrees < n can be chosen so that

                                     f (x) · g1 (x) + g(x) · f1 (x) = ε.                                            (9.)

Put
          γ = a0 α0n + a1 α0n−1 β0 + · · · + an β0n ,               δ = b0 α0n + b1 α0n−1 β0 + · · · + bn β0n .    (10.)
If β0 ̸= 0, then                                                               
                                     α0                                 α0
                                 γ=f                  β0n ,         δ=g               β0n ,
                                     β0                                 β0
and so by (9.)                                                       
                                             α0                    α0
                                   γg1                + δf1                 = β0n ̸= 0.
                                             β0                    β0
Thus γ and δ cannot both be 0. The same is also the case when β0 = 0. For then α0 ̸= 0,
γ = a0 α0n , δ = b0 α0n , and the assertion follows because a0 and b0 do not both vanish. But now γ
and δ are the coefficients of the n · ν-th power of x in the integral functions
                               (
                                 σ(x) = a0 φn + a1 φn−1 ψ + · · · + an ψ n ,
                                                                                               (11.)
                                 τ (x) = b0 φn + b1 φn−1 ψ + · · · + bn ψ n

                                                              12
Ernst Steinitz                                                                 Algebraic Theory of Fields


(where φ and ψ are written for φ(x) and ψ(x)). Of the functions σ(x) and τ (x), neither of which,
as is clear from (11.) and (8.), exceeds degree n · ν, at least one must therefore attain this degree.
By (8.)                                                        
                                        φ                         φ
                             σ(x) = f       ψn,       τ (x) = g      ψn,                         (12.)
                                        ψ                         ψ
and hence, by (7.),
                                                           σ(x)
                                           R(P (x)) =            .                                  (13.)
                                                           τ (x)
From (12.) and (9.) it follows that
                                                      
                                 φ    n−1               φ
                      σ(x) · g1     ψ     + τ (x) · f1     ψ n−1 = ψ 2n−1 ,        (14.)
                                 ψ                      ψ
                              
and here g1 ψφ ψ n−1 and f1 ψφ ψ n−1 are integral functions of x. Applying the notation
introduced above for the greatest common divisor, put

                                          (σ(x), τ (x)) = t(x),                                     (15.)

                                          (t(x), ψ(x)) = u(x).                                      (16.)
Then u(x) divides σ(x), τ (x), and ψ(x), hence, by (11.), also divides φn . But since φ(x) and
ψ(x) are coprime, we must have u(x) = ε. Thus t(x) is coprime to ψ(x), and hence also to ψ 2n−1 .
From (15.) and (14.), however, it follows that t(x) divides ψ 2n−1 . Therefore t(x) = ε, that is,
the functions σ(x) and τ (x) are coprime. Since at least one of them has degree n · ν and neither
has a higher degree, it follows from (13.) that the degree of the rational function R(P (x)) is
n · ν, as was to be proved. In the preceding proof we used the theorem that equations holding
between rational functions of a transcendental element x in a field K remain correct when any
element of the field K, or of any extension field of K, is substituted for x, provided only that this
substitution introduces no vanishing denominators. This theorem is an immediate consequence
of the fact that, for equality, sum, and product of two rational functions of a transcendental
element, only such stipulations were made as hold for every element x on the basis of the general
properties of fields, whether that element is transcendental or not.
   If y is an element of the field K(x), then K(y) is a field between K and K(x). Every element of
K(y), viewed as a rational function of x in K, has a degree which by 6. is divisible by the degree
n of the element y. If y is to be a primitive element of K(x) relative to K, so that K(y) = K(x),
then the degree of the element x, namely 1, must also be divisible by n, hence n = 1. This
condition is also sufficient. Indeed, if y = ax+b
                                             cx+d has degree 1, then, as is easy to see, ad − bc ̸= 0,
           dy−b
and x = −cy+a ; hence x belongs to the field K(y), and K(y) = K(x). Thus:
   7. The primitive elements of the field K(x) are the rational functions of degree 1.
   If z is any element of the field K(x) = K(y), which arises from K by adjoining the transcendental
element x or y, then z can be represented as a rational function of x or of y:

                                          z = R(x) = R1 (y).

Since y, considered as a function of x, has degree 1, it follows from 6. that the degree of R(x) in
x is equal to the degree of R1 (y) in y. Hence:
    8. If the field Ω can be obtained from K by adjoining a transcendental element, then every
element of Ω has a definite degree relative to K, independent of the choice of primitive element.
    We still prove the theorem: 9. Suppose that n elements x1 , x2 , . . . , xn are successively adjoined
to a field K0 , so that the fields

                        K0 (x1 ) = K1 ,   K1 (x2 ) = K2 , . . . ,    Kn−1 (xn ) = Kn

                                                     13
Ernst Steinitz                                                                            Algebraic Theory of Fields


arise, and that every element xk (k = 1, . . . , n) is transcendental relative to Kk−1 . Then every
element xk is transcendental relative to the field obtained from K0 by adjoining the remaining
n − 1 elements.
   Proof: We first show that x1 is transcendental relative to the field K0 (x2 ). If this were not
the case, there would be a relation

                                       c0 + c1 x1 + c2 x21 + · · · + cm xm
                                                                         1 = 0,                                        (17.)

where the coefficients c are elements of K0 (x2 ) and are not all equal to 0. Think of the coefficients
c as written as quotients of elements of K0 [x2 ] and multiply (17.) by the denominators; one
obtains a relation of the same form (17.) in which the coefficients c are now elements of K0 [x2 ]
and again are not all equal to 0. Let, for example,

                                       ck = ck0 + ck1 x2 + · · · + ckr xr2 ̸= 0.

Then at least one of the coefficients ck0 , ck1 , . . . , ckr , all of which are elements of K0 , say ckl , is
different from 0. If the left hand side of (17.) is now ordered by powers of x2 , one obtains

                                      C0 + C1 x2 + C2 x22 + · · · + Cs xs2 = 0,                                        (18.)

where the coefficients C are elements of K0 [x1 ], hence also of K0 (x1 ), and where Cl ̸= 0, since the
coefficient of the power xk1 occurring in Cl is ckl ̸= 0. But (18.) would imply that x2 is algebraic
relative to K0 (x1 ) = K1 . Since this contradicts the hypothesis, x1 is transcendental relative to
K0 (x2 ). — Thus Theorem 9 is proved in the case n = 2. If n > 2, one can proceed inductively.
The fields K2 , K3 , . . . , Kn arise from K1 by successively adjoining the n − 1 elements x2 , x3 , . . . , xn .
Since xk (k ≥ 2) is transcendental relative to Kk−1 , it may be regarded as proved that each
element xk (k ≥ 2) is transcendental relative to the field K′k obtained from K1 by adjoining the
remaining elements of the row x2 , x3 , . . . , xn . This field K′k is identical with the field obtained
from K0 by adjoining the elements x1 , . . . , xn with the exception of xk . It remains only to show
that x1 is also transcendental relative to K0 (x2 , x3 , . . . , xn ). Put K0 (x2 ) = K′1 . As has already
been shown, x1 is transcendental relative to K′1 . From K′1 one obtains the fields K2 , K3 , . . . , Kn by
adjoining successively x1 , x3 , . . . , xn . Since these are again only n − 1 elements, it follows that x1
is transcendental relative to K′1 (x3 , x4 , . . . , xn ); and since K′1 (x3 , x4 , . . . , xn ) = K0 (x2 , x3 , . . . , xn ),
the assertion is proved also in this case.
     We say of the field Kn that it arises from K0 by adjoining n transcendentals or indeterminates
x1 , x2 , . . . , xn , and we call the elements of Kn rational functions, and those of the integral domain
K0 [x1 , x2 , . . . , xn ] integral functions of these indeterminates. — Repeated application of Theorem
2 gives the following general fact: two extensions Ω and M of a field K, each of which is derived
by adjoining n transcendentals to K, are equivalent. If Ω = K(x1 , . . . , xn ) and M = K(y1 , . . . , yn ),
then there is a definite isomorphic relation between Ω and M which assigns the elements y1 , . . . , yn
to the elements x1 , . . . , xn and makes every element of K correspond to itself.

                                                            § 6.
                                    Adjunction of an algebraic element.

   Let f (x) be an integral function of degree n in a field K, and let α be an element of K. By
division by x − α one obtains
                                    f (x) = (x − α)q(x) + r,                                 (1.)
where q(x) is a function of degree n − 1 in K and r is an element of K. From (1.) it follows
that f (α) = r; hence, if α is a zero of f (x), that is, if f (α) = 0, we have the decomposition of
f (x) into (x − α) · q(x), from which one further concludes that an integral function of degree n

                                                             14
Ernst Steinitz                                                                        Algebraic Theory of Fields


in a field cannot have more than n zeros. — From the representation of the greatest common
divisor t(x) of two integral functions f (x), g(x) in § 5, (5.), it follows that every common zero
of f (x) and g(x) must be a zero of t(x), and therefore that coprime functions have no common
zero. Reducible and irreducible functions. — An integral function f (x) of degree n ≥ 1, whose
coefficients belong to a field K, is called reducible in K if there are in K two integral functions of
smaller degree whose product is equal to f (x); otherwise f (x) is called irreducible in K. If K1 is
a subfield of K and the coefficients of f (x) already belong to K1 , then it is clear that if f (x) is
irreducible in K, it must also be irreducible in K1 ; on the other hand, f (x) can be irreducible in
K1 and reducible in K. — Since a function φ(x) irreducible in the field K is coprime to every
other function over K which it does not divide, by § 5, 4. the product of two integral functions
f (x), g(x) over K is divisible by φ(x) only if at least one of the two functions f (x), g(x) is divisible
by φ(x). From this one concludes in the usual way that every integral function f (x) over K can
be decomposed into irreducible factors in only one way. Of course factors of degree zero are to
be disregarded12 .
   Let φ(x) be an integral function of the indeterminate x in the field K, with degree n (≥ 1),
and call two elements g1 (x), g2 (x) of K[x] congruent modulo φ(x),

                                            g1 (x) ≡ g2 (x) mod. φ(x),

if g1 (x) − g2 (x) is divisible by φ(x). Then all functions that are congruent to a given one are
also congruent to one another, and every function f (x) is congruent to a reduced function, i.e. to
a function whose degree is < n. From two congruences

                                g1 (x) ≡ g2 (x),        h1 (x) ≡ h2 (x) mod. φ(x)

we obtain the congruences

              g1 (x) + h1 (x) ≡ g2 (x) + h2 (x),         g1 (x) · h1 (x) ≡ g2 (x) · h2 (x) mod. φ(x).

If, therefore, congruent functions are collected into one residue class, then by two such classes
A, B two further classes C, D are uniquely determined in such a way that, whenever g(x) is any
element of A and h(x) one of B, g(x) + h(x) belongs to C and g(x) · h(x) belongs to D. Thus,
putting
                                   A + B = C,       A · B = D,
the residue classes form a system with double composition; and from the fact that the integral
domain K[x] satisfies conditions 1. through 6. of § 1, the same is easily inferred for the residue-
class system. The zero class, which may be denoted by 0, consists here of the functions divisible
by φ(x). If φ(x) is reducible and
                                       g(x) · h(x) = φ(x)                                       (2.)
is a decomposition, and if A and B denote the residue classes to which g(x) and h(x) respectively
belong, then by (2.) we have

                                        A ̸= 0,       B ̸= 0,       A · B = 0.

On the other hand, assume that φ(x) is irreducible. Then a product of two functions is divisible
by φ(x) only if at least one factor is divisible by φ(x), and therefore a product of two residue
classes is equal to 0 only if at least one factor is equal to 0. It further follows that from A ̸= 0
and AB = AC one always obtains B = C. Finally, let A and B be two residue classes, let A ̸= 0,
and let f (x), g(x) be functions from A and B respectively. Then f (x) is coprime to φ(x); hence
two elements ψ(x), χ(x) of K[x] can be chosen such that

                                           f (x) · ψ(x) + φ(x) · χ(x) = ε,
  12
       On the extension of these theorems to functions of several variables, see Weber, Math. Ann. 43, p. 521 ff., § 3.


                                                           15
Ernst Steinitz                                                              Algebraic Theory of Fields


and so
                             f (x) · (ψ(x) · g(x)) ≡ g(x) mod. φ(x).                              (3.)
If C denotes the residue class to which the function ψ(x) · g(x) belongs, then by (3.)

                                               A · C = B,

and thus the residue-class system also satisfies condition 7. of § 1. We therefore obtain the
theorem: 1. The residue-class system belonging to the integral function φ(x) over K is a field
precisely when φ(x) is irreducible in K.
   Now let K(j) be a field arising from K by adjoining an algebraic element j. Then the powers

                                         ε, j, j 2 , . . .    in inf.

are linearly dependent; and if n is the smallest number for which

                                             ε, j, j 2 , . . . , j n

are linearly dependent, then among these powers there exists a homogeneous linear relation with
coefficients in K whose last coefficient is non-zero and hence, since one can divide by it, may be
taken to be ε. The relation so obtained,

                           a0 + a1 j + a2 j 2 + · · · + an−1 j n−1 + j n = 0,                     (4.)

is uniquely determined. For if there were a second one, then by subtraction one would obtain
a homogeneous linear relation among the elements ε, j, . . . , j n−1 , which are supposed to be
linearly independent. We now consider the integral domain K[j] contained in K(j), which will
subsequently prove to be identical with K(j), and compare it with an integral domain K[x] arising
from K by adjoining a transcendental element x. The domain K[x] contains the function

                                φ(x) = xn + an−1 xn−1 + · · · + a0 ,

which by (4.) has the zero j. If g(x), h(x) are elements of K[x] and their degrees are < n, then,
because ε, j, . . . , j n−1 are linearly independent, g(j) ̸= 0 and h(j) ̸= 0; hence

                                       φ(j) = 0 ̸= g(j) · h(j),

and therefore
                                         φ(x) ̸= g(x) · h(x).
That is, φ(x) is not the product of two functions of smaller degree in K, hence is irreducible in
K. By the stated theorems on irreducible functions, φ(x) is the only irreducible function over K
with j as a zero, apart from a factor from K; but here that factor also disappears because of the
additional condition that the coefficient of the highest power shall be equal to ε. We call the
degree n of φ(x) also the degree of the element j relative to K, in symbols:

                                               n = [j : K].

We now assign to every element f (x) of K[x] the element f (j) of K[j]. If f (x) has degree 0, hence
is an element of K, then f (j) = f (x). The elements of K[j] corresponding to elements of K[x]
contain all elements of the form
                                      c0 + c1 j + · · · + ck j k
with arbitrary coefficients c from K, and hence exhaust the integral domain K[j]. However,
infinitely many elements of K[x] correspond to each element of K[j]. If f1 (x), f2 (x) are any two
elements of K[x], one can write

                               f1 (x) − f2 (x) = q(x) · φ(x) + r(x),                              (5.)

                                                      16
Ernst Steinitz                                                             Algebraic Theory of Fields


where q(x), r(x) are elements of K[x] and the degree of r(x) is < n. It follows that

                                        f1 (j) = f2 (j) + r(j),

and since r(j) can be equal to 0 only when r(x) = 0, that is, when by (5.) f1 (x) ≡ f2 (x) mod.
φ(x), the elements corresponding to a single element of K[j] are precisely the elements of a
definite residue class mod. φ(x). Thus we have a one-to-one correspondence between these
residue classes and K[j]. Further, since from

                            f (x) + g(x) = h(x),         f (x) · g(x) = k(x)

it always follows that
                            f (j) + g(j) = h(j),        f (j) · g(j) = k(j),
the correspondence is isomorphic. Since φ(x) is irreducible, the residue-class system is a field;
hence the isomorphic system K[j] must also be a field, and therefore K[j] = K(j). Since every
residue class contains exactly one function whose degree is < n, every element of K(j) is
represented exactly once in the form

                                     c0 + c1 j + · · · + cn−1 j n−1 ,                              (6.)

where the coefficients c are arbitrary elements of K.
    Let K(j̄) be a second extension of K, and let j̄ be a zero of the same irreducible function φ(x).
Then, just as there is an isomorphic correspondence between K(j) and the residue-class system
mod. φ(x), there is one between this system and K(j̄). These yield an isomorphism between
K(j) and K(j̄) in which, by the preceding, every element of K corresponds to itself. The two
extensions are therefore equivalent. — Conversely, it is easy to see that to every irreducible
function φ(x) over K there really belongs an extension K(j) in which j is a zero of φ(x). Namely,
let Ω denote the residue-class field belonging to φ(x). There is an isomorphic correspondence π0
between K and a subfield K of Ω, assigning to each element a of K the residue class represented
by a. We now introduce a system S of new elements, which we assign one-to-one to the elements
of Ω that do not belong to K. This assignment and π0 give a mapping π1 between Ω and the
system Ω = K + S. If A, B, C, D are elements of Ω and a, b, c, d are the corresponding elements
of Ω, and if A + B = C, A · B = D, then, if a and b belong to K, a + b = c and a · b = d. If we
decree that these equations are to hold also in the other cases, then Ω becomes a field isomorphic
to Ω, and it is an extension of K. Let j be the element of Ω which under the isomorphism π1
corresponds to the residue class represented by x. It follows immediately from the definition of
addition and multiplication of residue classes that: An element g(x) of K[x] represents a residue
class to which π1 assigns the element g(j) of Ω. Consequently φ(j) = 0, and the elements of the
form g(j) exhaust the field Ω; hence Ω = K(j). Thus:
    2. Every irreducible function φ(x) over K determines one and, apart from equivalent extensions,
only one extension K(j) in which j is a zero of φ(x).
   If φ(x) has degree n and if γ0 , γ1 , . . . , γn are any n + 1 elements of K(j), we can represent
them in the form
                      γi = ci0 + ci1 j + · · · + ci,n−1 j n−1    (i = 0, . . . , n)
with coefficients in K. From the theorem on linear equations mentioned     P in § 1, it follows that
we can choose in K n + 1 elements b0 , . . . , bn , not all zero, such that ni=0 bi γi = 0. Thus n + 1
elements are always linearly dependent. Since this also holds for the powers ε, γ, γ 2 , . . . , γ n of
any element of K(j), we have the theorem:
    3. If the field Ω arises from K by adjoining an algebraic element j, then all elements of Ω are
algebraic. If n is the degree of j, then every system of more than n elements is linearly dependent.


                                                   17
Ernst Steinitz                                                                  Algebraic Theory of Fields


                                                    § 7.
                             Foundations of algebraic extensions.

    Algebraic extensions; algebraically closed fields. — After §§ 5 and 6 have investigated the
simplest extensions, the primitive ones, and have led to a distinction between (relatively) algebraic
and transcendental elements, we shall now first consider algebraic extensions more closely. A
field Ω is called algebraic relative to a subfield K, or an algebraic extension of K, if every element
of Ω is algebraic relative to K. Every field Ω contains elements that are algebraic relative to a
given subfield K. For it is clear that every element of K itself is algebraic relative to K, and in
fact of degree 1. Likewise one sees immediately that an element of Ω not belonging to K, if it
is algebraic relative to K, has degree > 1, hence is a zero of a function irreducible in K and of
degree greater than the first. Thus, if an algebraic extension Ω of K is to exist, and specifically a
proper one, i.e. one different from K, it is necessary, and by § 6, 2. also sufficient, that there
be irreducible functions in K whose degree is > 1. If none are present, so that every integral
function of higher degree decomposes into linear factors, then the field K is no longer capable
of any algebraic extension and will therefore be called algebraically closed. The existence of
such fields was first proved by the fundamental theorem of algebra, which asserts that the field
of complex numbers is algebraically closed. Absolutely algebraic elements and fields. — If an
element α of a field Ω is algebraic relative to a subfield K1 , then of course it is also algebraic
relative to every field between K1 and Ω. Therefore, if α is algebraic relative to the prime field
contained in Ω, then α is algebraic relative to every subfield. Such an element α shall therefore
be called absolutely algebraic. Likewise we call a field absolutely algebraic if it is already algebraic
relative to its prime field, or, equivalently, if all of its elements are absolutely algebraic.
   Finite extensions. — If K is a subfield of Ω, we say that Ω is finite relative to K and of degree
n — in symbols
                                            [Ω : K] = n
— if one can specify in Ω n elements linearly independent relative to K, while every system of
more than n elements from Ω is linearly dependent relative to K.
    1. Every finite extension of a field is algebraic.
    For if [Ω : K] = n and α is an element of Ω, then the elements ε, α, α2 , . . . , αn are linearly
dependent relative to K, i.e. α is algebraic relative to K. But there are also infinite (non-finite)
algebraic extensions, for example the extension of the field of rational numbers to the field of all
algebraic numbers. — One sees at once that every field K is finite relative to itself, namely of
degree 1, while every proper finite extension has degree > 1.
    Basis of a finite extension. — Suppose the field Ω is finite relative to its subfield K, [Ω : K] = n,
and that the elements α1 , . . . , αn of Ω are linearly independent relative to K. If β is any element
of Ω, then among α1 , . . . , αn and β there is a homogeneous linear relation with coefficients in K,
which, because the coefficient of β is non-zero, can be given the form

                                        β = c1 α1 + · · · + cn αn .                                   (1.)

This representation is possible in only one way, because two equations for β of this form would
by subtraction give a homogeneous linear relation among α1 , . . . , αn . — Conversely, let us now
assume that α1 , . . . , αn are elements of some extension field Ω of K. If it is known that every
element β of Ω can be represented at most one way in the form (1.), then this also holds for
β = 0; hence the expression c1 α1 + · · · + cn αn is equal to 0 only when all coefficients are 0.
Therefore the extension Ω, if it is finite at all, has degree at least n. If, on the other hand, it is
known that every element β of Ω can be represented at least one way in the form (1.), then for
any n + 1 elements β0 , β1 , . . . , βn one obtains representations of the form

                             βi = ci1 α1 + · · · + cin αn     (i = 0, . . . , n),

                                                    18
Ernst Steinitz                                                                      Algebraic Theory of Fields


and hence, by the theorem on homogeneous linear equations cited in § 1, one can choose n + 1
elements d0 , . . . , dn in K, not all zero, such that d0 β0 + · · · + dn βn = 0. Thus the extension Ω
is finite and has degree at most n. — Consequently, if the representation (1.) is to be possible
in one and only one way for all elements of Ω, then one must have [Ω : K] = n, and the system
α1 , . . . , αn must be linearly independent. For this reason, a system of n linearly independent
elements of an extension field of degree n is called a basis of this field relative to the ground
field. — If the elements α1 , . . . , αn form a basis for the extension field Ω, and if β1 , . . . , βn are
any elements of Ω whose representation in the form (1.) is

                             βi = ci1 α1 + · · · + cin αn         (i = 1, . . . , n),

then one shows in the usual way that the elements β1 , . . . , βn form a basis for Ω if and only if
the determinant |cik | is different from zero.
   In connection with this we derive some simple theorems on finite extensions:
2. If Ω is an extension of K and M an extension of Ω, then M is finite relative to K if and only
if Ω is finite relative to K and M is finite relative to Ω; and in this case

                                      [M : K] = [Ω : K] · [M : Ω].

   Indeed, if [M : K] = ν, then among ν + 1 elements of M there is a homogeneous linear relation
with coefficients belonging to K, hence also to Ω. Thus M is finite relative to Ω. Likewise,
among ν + 1 elements of Ω, since they belong to M, there is a homogeneous linear relation with
coefficients in K; that is, Ω is finite relative to K. Conversely, suppose that

                                    [Ω : K] = m,            [M : Ω] = n.

Choose a basis α1 , . . . , αm of Ω relative to K and a basis β1 , . . . , βn of M relative to Ω. Then the
m · n elements α
               Pi · βk (i = 1, . . . , m; k = 1, . . . , n) are linearly independent relative to K. For
from a relation i,k cik αi βk = 0, in which the coefficients cik belong to the field K, it follows, if
                                   m
                                   X
                                         cik αi = γk        (k = 1, . . . , n)                            (2.)
                                   i=1
            P
is put, that nk=1 γk βk = 0. Since the coefficients γk belong to Ω and the elements βk form a
basis of M, one must have γ1 = 0, . . . , γn = 0. But then (2.) implies that all m · n coefficients
cik must be equal to 0, proving the linear independence of the elements αi βk . Further, if τ is any
element of M, then one obtains
                                      τ = σ1 β1 + · · · + σn βn ,
where the coefficients σk belong to Ω, and

                                      σk = a1k α1 + · · · + amk αm ,

where the coefficients aik are elements of K. Hence
                                             X
                                         τ=     aik αi βk .
                                                   i,k

Thus every element of M is expressible linearly and homogeneously, with coefficients from K, in
terms of the m · n elements αi βk , which are linearly independent relative to K; hence

                                             [M : K] = m · n.

    3. If Ω and M are finite extensions of equal degree over K and Ω is contained in M, then Ω
is identical with M. For by 2. [M : Ω] = 1, hence Ω = M.

                                                       19
Ernst Steinitz                                                                     Algebraic Theory of Fields


4. If K(j) is a simple algebraic extension of K, then

                                              [K(j) : K] = [j : K].

   Indeed, if [j : K] = n, then, as was shown in the preceding section, every element of K(j) is
representable in one and only one way in the form

                                          c0 + c1 j + · · · + cn−1 j n−1

with coefficients from K; hence the elements ε, j, . . . , j n−1 form a basis of K(j) relative to K.
    5. If the field Ω is finite of degree n relative to its subfield K, then the degree of every element
of Ω (relative to K) divides n; the extension Ω is simple if and only if elements of degree n occur,
and in that case these elements are primitive and all others imprimitive.
    For if j is any element of Ω, then by 2. and 4.

                                      n = [Ω : K] = [Ω : K(j)] · [j : K],

so [j : K] divides n. Further, for j to be a primitive element of Ω, i.e. for Ω = K(j), it is necessary
and sufficient that [Ω : K(j)] = 1, hence that [j : K] = n.
    6. An extension is finite if and only if it can be obtained by adjoining a finite number of
(relatively) algebraic elements.
   Indeed, if Ω = K0 (j1 , j2 , . . . , jν ), where the elements j1 , j2 , . . . , jν are algebraic relative to K0 ,
and if one sets
                    K0 (j1 ) = K1 , K1 (j2 ) = K2 , . . . , Kν−1 (jν ) = Kν = Ω,
then every element jk is algebraic relative to the field Kk−1 lying between K0 and Ω; hence Kk
is a simple algebraic and therefore finite extension of Kk−1 . It follows from 2. that Kν = Ω is
also a finite extension of K0 . — Conversely, suppose Ω is a finite extension of K0 , [Ω : K0 ] = n,
and let j1 be an element of Ω not belonging to K0 ; further, if K1 = K0 (j1 ) is not yet equal to
Ω, let j2 be an element not belonging to K1 ; if K2 = K1 (j2 ) is not yet equal to Ω, let j3 be an
element of Ω not belonging to K2 , and so on. Then the degrees [K1 : K0 ], [K2 : K0 ], . . . form a
strictly increasing sequence not exceeding n, which can be continued as long as the number n
has not yet been reached. Therefore, after a finite number ν of steps the number n is reached,
and then K0 (j1 , j2 , . . . , jν ) = Kν = Ω.
    To these theorems are added several more that concern arbitrary algebraic extensions:
    7. If the field Ω = K(S) is obtained from its subfield K by adjoining a system S, all of whose
elements are algebraic relative to K, then Ω is algebraic relative to K.
    If S is a finite system, then by 6. Ω is finite relative to K, and hence algebraic. If, however, S
is infinite, then nevertheless (§ 2, 3.) every element α of Ω is contained in a field arising from K
by adjoining a finite subsystem of S; hence, as in the preceding case, it is algebraic relative to K.
   8. The elements of a field Ω that are algebraic relative to a subfield K form a field between K
and Ω; in particular, the absolutely algebraic elements of Ω form a field.
    Indeed, let S be the system of all elements of Ω algebraic relative to K. Then the field K(S)
lying between K and Ω contains only elements algebraic relative to K (Theorem 7), whence
S = K(S).
    9. If the field Ω lies between the fields K and M, and if Ω is algebraic relative to K and M is
algebraic relative to Ω, then M is algebraic relative to K.
    Let β be any element of M. If [β : Ω] = n, then we have an equation

                                  α0 + α1 β + · · · + αn−1 β n−1 + β n = 0,                                    (3.)

                                                        20
Ernst Steinitz                                                                Algebraic Theory of Fields


where α0 , α1 , . . . , αn−1 are elements of Ω. These elements are algebraic relative to K, and so by 6.
the field K′ = K(α0 , α1 , . . . , αn−1 ) is finite relative to K. Further, by equation (3.), the element β
is algebraic relative to K′ , so K′ (β) is finite relative to K′ . Thus by 2. K′ (β) is finite relative to K,
and hence β is algebraic relative to K, which proves Theorem 9.


§ 8. Decomposition of an arbitrary polynomial into linear factors.
Normal fields and normal functions.
In § 6 it was shown that every polynomial irreducible in a field has a root in a suitable extension
field. Following this, one can now treat the further problem of extending a field in such a way
that an arbitrarily given function from the original field decomposes completely, that is, into
linear factors, in the extension field.
    Let f (x) now be an arbitrary polynomial in a field K0 , let n be the degree of f (x), and let
m0 be the number of factors of f (x) irreducible in K0 . Then m0 ≤ n, and it is equal to n if and
only if f (x) decomposes completely in K0 . Suppose that m0 < n. Then f (x) has an irreducible
factor g1 (x) whose degree is > 1. We extend K0 by adjoining an element j1 for which g1 (j1 ) = 0
(§ 6). Since in the field K1 = K0 (j1 ) the function g1 (x) is no longer irreducible, the number m1
of irreducible factors of f (x) in K1 is > m0 ; hence m0 < m1 ≤ n. If m1 < n, let g2 (x) be an
irreducible non-linear factor of f (x) within K1 . We adjoin a root j2 of g2 (x), put K1 (j2 ) = K2 ,
and denote by m2 the number of irreducible factors of f (x) in K2 , so that m0 < m1 < m2 ≤ n.
We continue in this way until we arrive at a field Kν for which mν = n, that is, in which f (x)
decomposes into linear factors. The field Kν is then a finite extension of K0 . Let j1 , . . . , jν be
the elements successively adjoined, let Kr = Kr−1 (jr ) (r = 1, . . . , ν) be the fields successively
obtained, and let gr (x) be the factor of f (x) irreducible in Kr−1 with root jr . We may say that
the extension Kν just suffices for the complete decomposition of f (x). This means that no field
different from Kν between K0 and Kν already suffices for this purpose; and this follows from the
fact that the adjoined elements j1 , . . . , jν are all roots of f (x) and therefore must occur in every
subfield of Kν which effects the decomposition.
    Let K0 now be a field isomorphic to K0 , and let π0 denote an isomorphism between K0
and K0 . By π0 , every polynomial g(x) from K0 is assigned a definite polynomial g(x) from K0 ,
obtained by replacing the coefficients of g(x) by the corresponding elements in K0 . The resulting
relation between K0 [x] and K0 [x] is plainly also an isomorphism. Therefore, if f (x) and g 1 (x)
are the functions from K0 assigned to the functions f (x) and g1 (x) occurring above, then f (x)
decomposes in K0 into m0 irreducible factors, and g 1 (x) is one of them. Let Ω be any extension
field of K0 in which f (x) decomposes completely. Then the extension Ω either just suffices for the
complete decomposition of f (x) or it does not; in every case a definite field M between K0 and
Ω, namely the one obtained by adjoining to K0 the roots j of f (x) lying in Ω, has this property.
Since f (x) decomposes completely in M, the factor g 1 (x) of f (x) has roots in M. Let j 1 be
such a root, and let r denote the degree of g1 (x) and g 1 (x). By the isomorphism between K0 [x]
and K0 [x], the functions g1 (x) and g 1 (x) are assigned to one another; hence the residue-class
fields belonging to these functions as moduli are isomorphic to one another. These residue-class
fields, however, stand in isomorphic relation to the fields K0 (j1 ) = K1 and K0 (j 1 ) = K1 , and there
results an isomorphism π1 between K1 and K1 by which each element of K1 , written in the form
                                       a0 + a1 j1 + · · · + ar−1 j1r−1
with coefficients a from K0 , is assigned the element
                                                                   r−1
                                       a0 + a1 j 1 + · · · + ar−1 j 1
of K1 obtained by replacing ak (k = 0, . . . , r − 1) by the corresponding element ak of K0 under
π0 . The relation π0 is contained in π1 , since π1 assigns to one another the elements of the fields

                                                      21
Ernst Steinitz                                                                Algebraic Theory of Fields


K0 and K0 in the same way as π0 . We may therefore say: there is an isomorphism π1 between
K1 and K1 under which the function f (x) from K1 is assigned the function f (x) from K1 ; the
field M is an extension of K1 which just suffices for the complete decomposition of f (x). We can
therefore apply to K1 , K1 , π1 , f (x), f (x) the same argument just applied to K0 , K0 , π0 , f (x), f (x).
Continuing in this way, we arrive at a sequence of fields

                                              K0 , K1 , . . . , Kν

with the following properties: each preceding field is contained in the following one, and all are
contained in M. Between Kr and Kr (r = 0, . . . , ν) there is an isomorphism πr which includes π0
and therefore assigns the functions f (x) and f (x) to one another. Since f (x) decomposes into
linear factors in Kν , the same holds for f (x) in Kν ; and since Kν lies between K0 and M, while
M was to be an extension of K0 just sufficient for the complete decomposition of f (x), we have
Kν = M. Thus we have the theorem:
    1. Let K0 and K0 be isomorphic fields, and let π0 denote an isomorphism between them which
assigns to the polynomial f (x) from K0 the polynomial f (x) from K0 . If R and R are extensions
of K0 and K0 , respectively, which just suffice for the complete decomposition of f (x) and f (x),
respectively, then there is an isomorphism π ′ between R and R which includes the relation π0 .
     The hypotheses of theorem 1 are fulfilled if K0 = K0 is taken and π0 is understood as the
relation which lets every element of K0 correspond to itself. Then f (x) = f (x), and the relation
π ′ likewise leaves every element of K0 unchanged; that is, R and R are equivalent extensions.
Thus we have the following result:
    2. To every polynomial f (x) of a field K0 there belongs one, and essentially only one, extension
of this field which just suffices for the complete decomposition of f (x).
    This is the reason why all theorems about roots of equations that matter for us are independent
of the way in which we extend the ground field in order to solve the equations. To spell this out
somewhat more closely, let

                                 f (x) = (x − ω1 )(x − ω2 ) · · · (x − ωn )

be the decomposition of a function f (x) of a field K0 in an extension field Ω. Then the field
R = K0 (ω1 , . . . , ωn ) lying between K0 and Ω is an extension just sufficient for this decomposition.
If one has a second decomposition of f (x) in another extension field Ω′ , and if R′ is the field
obtained from K0 by adjoining the roots of f (x) occurring in Ω′ , then there is an isomorphism π ′
between R and R′ which leaves all elements of K0 unchanged, and the decomposition of f (x) in
Ω′ is
                                   f (x) = (x − ω1′ )(x − ω2′ ) · · · (x − ωn′ ),
where ωi and ωi′ (i = 1, . . . , n) correspond to one another under the isomorphism π ′ . Thus if we
have a rational combination of ω1 , . . . , ωn with coefficients from K0 , hence an element of R, we
obtain the corresponding element of R′ by replacing each ωi by ωi′ . In particular, if certain of
the roots ωi are equal, then the corresponding roots ωi′ must also be equal. Hence we can speak
of the number of simple, double, triple, ... roots of an equation without specifying the extension
field. The determination of these numbers will be carried out later (§ 10).
    Normal extensions. — The extensions of a field K0 which just suffice for the complete
decomposition of a function f (x) belong to the special kind of normal extensions. An extension
field R of K0 is called normal with respect to K0 if it is algebraic with respect to K0 and
if, moreover, every polynomial f (x) from K0 which is irreducible in K0 and has a root in R
decomposes into linear factors in R. Plainly every extension equivalent to a normal extension is
again normal. We derive a few simple theorems concerning normal fields.
    3. If the field R is normal with respect to its subfield K0 , then it is also normal with respect
to every field K1 between K0 and R.

                                                      22
Ernst Steinitz                                                                  Algebraic Theory of Fields


    First, R is algebraic with respect to K1 . Now let φ(x) be a polynomial irreducible in K1 , and
suppose that φ(x) has a root j in R. Then j is also a root of an irreducible polynomial f (x) of
the field K0 , and since R is normal with respect to K0 , f (x) decomposes into linear factors in R.
But f (x) is also a function in the field K1 and has the root j in common with the irreducible
function φ(x) of this field; therefore φ(x) is a factor of f (x). Hence φ(x) also decomposes into
linear factors in R. This proves the assertion.
    Normal functions. — A polynomial f (x) of a field K0 is to be called normal in K0 if it is
irreducible in K0 and, in addition, the extension K0 (j) obtained by adjoining a root j of f (x)
is normal. If f (x) is normal in K0 , then f (x) decomposes into linear factors in the field K0 (j)
obtained by adjoining a root j of f (x). This follows directly from the definition of normal
extensions and functions. But the converse also holds.
    4. If a function f (x) irreducible in a field K0 decomposes completely in the field K0 (j) obtained
by adjoining a root j, then it is normal with respect to K0 .
   Indeed, if g(x) is an irreducible function from K0 and g(x) has a root α in K0 (j), then we can
put α = φ(j), where φ(x) denotes a polynomial from K0 . If

                                  f (x) = (x − j)(x − j1 ) · · · (x − jn−1 )

is the assumed decomposition of f (x) in K0 (j), then one concludes in the known way that the
coefficients of the function

                            h(x) = (x − φ(j))(x − φ(j1 )) · · · (x − φ(jn−1 ))

are symmetric functions of j, j1 , . . . , jn−1 and hence elements of K0 . Thus h(x) is a function in
K0 which has with the function g(x) irreducible in K0 the common factor x − φ(j), and therefore
is divisible by g(x). Since h(x) decomposes completely in K0 (j), the same holds for g(x); that is,
for every irreducible function in K0 which has a root in K0 (j). Thus K0 (j) is a normal extension
of K0 , and consequently f (x) is normal in K0 .
    5. If f (x) is a normal function of the field K0 , and Ω is any extension of K0 , then every
factor of f (x) irreducible in Ω is normal in Ω.
    Indeed, if g(x) is such a factor and Ω is extended by adjoining a root j of g(x), then Ω(j)
contains the field K0 (j), and j is a root of f (x). Since the function f (x) is normal in K0 , it
decomposes into linear factors in K0 (j) and therefore also in Ω(j). Since in the field Ω the
function g(x) is a factor of f (x), g(x) also decomposes into linear factors in Ω(j). Therefore by
theorem 4, g(x) is normal in Ω, as was to be shown. 6. An extension R of a field K0 which just
suffices to decompose completely a function f (x) from K0 is normal.
    For if
                                   f (x) = (x − j1 )(x − j2 ) · · · (x − jn )
is the decomposition of f (x) in R, and if g(x) is an irreducible function of the field K0 which has
in R a root β, then β can be represented in the form

                                           β = ψ(j1 , j2 , . . . , jn ),

where ψ(x1 , x2 , . . . , xn ) denotes a polynomial from K0 . The n! permutations of the elements
j1 , j2 , . . . , jn give from β n! elements of the field R, which we may call β, β1 , . . . , βn!−1 . The
function
                                    φ(x) = (x − β)(x − β1 ) · · · (x − βn!−1 )
lies in the field K0 , since its coefficients are symmetric functions of j1 , j2 , . . . , jn with coefficients
from K0 ; it has with the function g(x) irreducible in K0 the common factor x − β, and so is
divisible by g(x). Since φ(x) decomposes completely in R, g(x) also decomposes completely in
R. Thus the conditions for a normal extension are fulfilled.

                                                       23
Ernst Steinitz                                                                Algebraic Theory of Fields


   In theorems 1, 2, and 6 of this paragraph, in place of a single function f (x) of the field K0
one may of course put a system S consisting of a finite number of functions of this field. For if
the system S consists of the functions

                                      φ1 (x), φ2 (x), . . . , φm (x)

and if
                                   f (x) = φ1 (x) · φ2 (x) · · · φm (x)
is set, then it is clear that in an extension field Ω of K0 all functions of the system S decompose
completely if and only if the function f (x) decomposes completely in Ω.


§ 9. Differentiation.
To determine the number of roots of specified multiplicity, we bring in the derivatives of functions.
The derivative, or differential quotient, dx
                                           d
                                             f (x) = f ′ (x) of a polynomial

                                    f (x) = a0 + a1 x + · · · + an xn

in an indeterminate x with respect to this indeterminate is defined by us purely formally as the
expression
                                 a1 + 2a2 x + · · · + nan xn−1 ,
so that f ′ (x) occurs as a function in every field K in which f (x) occurs. From this definition it
follows immediately, if
                                   g(x) = b0 + b1 x + · · · + bm xm
is a second function from K, that
                                d                   d          d
                                  (f (x) ± g(x)) =    f (x) ±    g(x).
                               dx                  dx         dx
Furthermore,
          d                d X                X
            (f (x)g(x)) =        aq br xq+r =   (q + r)aq br xq+r−1
         dx               dx
                          X                   X                         d       d
                        =    aq xq rbr xr−1 +    qaq xq−1 br xr = f (x) g(x) +    f (x) g(x),
                                                                       dx      dx
hence
                                d
                                  (f (x)g(x)) = f (x)g ′ (x) + f ′ (x)g(x).
                               dx
    Let R(x) now be a rational function of x. We can represent it in different ways as a quotient
of polynomials,
                                               u    u1
                                       R(x) = =        .
                                               v    v1
Then
                                              uv1 = vu1 .                                            (1)
Taking the derivative on both sides, one obtains

                                      uv1′ + u′ v1 = vu′1 + v ′ u1 ,

and hence
                                      u′ v1 − vu′1 = v ′ u1 − uv1′ .                                 (2)


                                                   24
Ernst Steinitz                                                                    Algebraic Theory of Fields


Multiplying this equation by vv1 , one obtains

                                 v12 vu′ − v 2 v1 u′1 = vv1 (v ′ u1 − uv1′ ).                            (3)

Multiplying equation (1) by vv1′ + v ′ v1 , one obtains

                                vv1 uv1′ + v12 uv ′ = vv1 v ′ u1 + v 2 u1 v1′ ,

therefore
                                 v12 uv ′ − v 2 u1 v1′ = vv1 (v ′ u1 − uv1′ ).                           (4)
From (3) and (4) follows
                                  (vu′ − uv ′ )v12 = (v1 u′1 − u1 v1′ )v 2 ,
so that
                                      vu′ − uv ′   v1 u′1 − u1 v1′
                                                 =                 .                                     (5)
                                          v2              v12
We are therefore justified in understanding by the derivative of a rational function R(x) = uv the
             ′     ′
expression vu v−uv
                2    , because this definition, as equation (5) shows, is independent of the particular
representation of R(x), and because, in the case in which R(x) is equal to a polynomial u (which
can be written in the form uε ), it agrees with the earlier definition. Direct calculation then
immediately gives, for any two rational functions u, v, the laws
                                           d
                                             (u ± v) = u′ ± v ′ ,                                        (6)
                                          dx
                                          d
                                            (uv) = uv ′ + u′ v,                                          (7)
                                         dx
                                          d  u  vu′ − uv ′
                                                 =             .                                         (8)
                                         dx v           v2
From (7) one further obtains
                                           d n
                                             u = nun−1 u′ ,
                                          dx
and hence, if λ(u) = a0 + a1 u + · · · + an un is a polynomial in u (in the field K),

                      d                                              d        du
                        λ(u) = (a1 + 2a2 u + · · · + nan un−1 )u′ =    λ(u) ·    .
                     dx                                             du        dx
Application of this equation gives, if µ(x) likewise denotes a polynomial,
                                     d              d
                      d λ(u)   µ(u) du λ(u) − λ(u) du µ(u) du    d λ(u) du
                             =                 2
                                                              =        ·   .
                     dx µ(u)             (µ(u))            dx   du µ(u) dx

In other words: if v is a rational function of u, and u is a rational function of x, then
                                              dv   dv du
                                                 =   ·   .
                                              dx   du dx
The concept of differential quotient can also be extended still further, but this will not be pursued
here.




                                                     25
Ernst Steinitz                                                                 Algebraic Theory of Fields


§ 10. The multiplicity of the roots of a polynomial.
In the questions treated so far, the characteristic of the field has been of no importance. In the
following investigations, however, we encounter essential differences between fields of characteristic
0 and fields of prime characteristic. This first appears in the question under what circumstances
the derivative of a rational function vanishes.
    Let a field K be given, and let

                                     f (x) = a0 + a1 x + · · · + an xn

be a polynomial in the indeterminate x over K. Then

                                 f ′ (x) = a1 + 2a2 x + · · · + nan xn−1 ,

so that in the case of characteristic 0, f ′ (x) vanishes only when a1 = 0, a2 = 0, ..., an = 0, that
is, when f (x) does not contain x. But if the characteristic of K is a prime p, then the coefficient
q · aq occurring in f ′ (x) is equal to 0 when aq = 0 or when q is divisible by p (§ 4, 4). Hence
f ′ (x) vanishes if and only if in f (x) only powers of x whose exponent is divisible by p actually
occur — in other words, if f (x) is a polynomial in xp . If we have a rational function in K which
                                                                                                ′   ′
we write, in reduced form, as the quotient uv of two polynomials, then its derivative is vu v−uv  2
and is therefore equal to 0 only when vu′ = uv ′ . Since u and v are relatively prime, this equation
can hold only when v divides v ′ and u divides u′ (§ 5, 3). But since the degrees of u′ and v ′ are
respectively smaller than the degrees of u and v, this is possible only when u′ = 0, v ′ = 0, that
is, when u and v are free of x, or, in the case of characteristic p, functions of xp . Thus we have
the theorem:
   1. For the derivative of a rational function R(x) to vanish, it is necessary and sufficient that
R(x) be free of x, respectively a rational function of xp , according as the characteristic is 0 or p.
    Let f (x) now be a polynomial in a field K. Within a suitable extension field f (x) decomposes
into linear factors, and if x − α is an r-fold factor (r > 0), then

                                         f (x) = (x − α)r g(x),                                        (1)

where g(x) no longer contains the factor x − α. From (1) follows

                             f ′ (x) = (x − α)r−1 (rεg(x) + (x − α)g ′ (x)),                           (2)

from which one sees that the derivative f ′ (x) contains the factor x − α at least (r − 1) times,
and contains it exactly (r − 1) times when rε ̸= 0. If, however, K has characteristic p and r is
divisible by p, then rε = 0, and f ′ (x) = (x − α)r g ′ (x) is divisible by (x − α)r . Thus:
     2. If f (x) has an r-fold linear factor (r ≥ 1), then the derivative f ′ (x) has this factor at least
(r − 1) times; it has it at least r times if the field K to which f (x) belongs has characteristic p
and r is divisible by the prime p, otherwise exactly (r − 1) times. (If the derivative vanishes, then
it is divisible by every arbitrarily high power of x − α, and in this sense contains the factor x − α
infinitely often.)
    From 2 one easily obtains, for fields of arbitrary characteristic: 3. If f (x) has only simple
factors, then the greatest common divisor

                                               (f (x), f ′ (x))

of f (x) and f ′ (x) is equal to ε; otherwise it is at least of first degree.
    Let
                             f (x) = (x − α1 )r1 (x − α2 )r2 · · · (x − αν )rν ,                       (3)

                                                     26
Ernst Steinitz                                                                      Algebraic Theory of Fields


where the roots αi are distinct and the exponents ri > 0. If the characteristic is p and f (x) is
the p-th power of a polynomial (of the original field or of an extension field), then all exponents
ri are divisible by p. Therefore, by 2, f ′ (x) contains each factor x − αi at least as often as f (x)
and is thus divisible by f (x). Since, however, the degree of f ′ (x) is smaller than the degree of
f (x), this is possible only when f ′ (x) = 0. This also follows immediately from the fact that,
by differentiating an equation of the form f (x) = [φ(x)]p , one obtains f ′ (x) = p[φ(x)]p−1 φ′ (x),
and hence, in characteristic p, f ′ (x) = 0. It follows, however, that f (x) is a polynomial in xp .
Conversely, if f (x) is assumed to be a polynomial in xp , then f ′ (x) vanishes, and by 2 it follows
that all exponents ri are divisible by p. Thus:
    4. In characteristic p, f (x) is a polynomial in xp if and only if f (x) is the p-th power of a
polynomial.
   We can derive this result in another way. If a and b are any two elements of a field K of
characteristic p, the binomial expansion gives

                                          (a + b)p = ap + bp ,

because all other terms of the expansion have a numerical coefficient divisible by p and hence
disappear. Raising this equation to the p-th power, one obtains
                                         2                          2       2
                                (a + b)p = (ap + bp )p = ap + bp ,

and, continuing in this way, in general
                                                   f        f       f
                                        (a + b)p = ap + bp                                                  (4)

for every natural number f . Similarly,
                                                   f        f       f
                                        (a − b)p = ap − bp .                                                (5)
                                                                                                f
For odd p this follows from the same expansion. If p = 2, however, then 2b = 0, 2bp = 0, so that
            f      f
−b = b, −bp = bp , and formulas (4) and (5) are identical. From (4) follows immediately
                                                   f        f           f           f
                          (a1 + a2 + · · · + an )p = ap1 + ap2 + · · · + apn .                              (4’)

We can also apply this equation to polynomials in an indeterminate x over the field K, since these
belong to the field K(x), which also has characteristic p (§ 4, 3). Then one sees at once that the
                                                     f                                            f
pf -th power of such a function is a polynomial in xp . Conversely, if f (x) is a polynomial in xp ,
                                               f                f               f
                            f (x) = c0 + c1 xp + c2 x2p + · · · + cn xnp ,
                                                                                f          f            f
and if we extend the field K to a field Ω in which the functions xp − c0 , xp − c1 , ..., xp − cn
decompose into linear factors, then one can determine in Ω elements γ0 , γ1 , . . . , γn such that
   f
γkp = ck . Then
                                                                        f
                           f (x) = (γ0 + γ1 x + γ2 x2 + · · · + γn xn )p .
Thus theorem 4 is again proved, in a somewhat more general form:
                                                                f
    4a. In characteristic p, f (x) is a polynomial in xp if and only if f (x) is the pf -th power of a
polynomial in x.
   Let F (x) be a polynomial in the indeterminate x over a field K of arbitrary characteristic; let
the coefficient of the highest power of x be ε, and let

                                  F (x) = (x − α1 )r1 · · · (x − αν )rν                                     (6)


                                                       27
Ernst Steinitz                                                                  Algebraic Theory of Fields


be the decomposition of F (x) in a suitable extension field, with α1 , . . . , αν assumed distinct. For
every natural number m we denote by fm (x) the product of those linear factors, taken simply, of
F (x) which occur in F (x) with multiplicity m. If none occur, set fm (x) = ε. Thus

                               F (x) = f1 (x) · (f2 (x))2 · (f3 (x))3 · · · .                          (7)

We now prove the following theorems: 5. If the characteristic of K is 0, then each of the functions
fm (x) belongs to the field K and can be determined rationally.
   6. If the characteristic of K is p, and m is not divisible by p, then fm (x) belongs to the field
K and can be determined rationally.
    7. If the characteristic of K is p, and π = pf is the highest power of p contained in m, then
(fm (x))π belongs to the field K and can be determined rationally.
   Indeed, if F ′ (x) denotes the derivative of F (x) with respect to x, then from 2 it follows that
the function belonging to the field K,

                                                      F (x)
                                        φ(x) =                     ,
                                                  (F (x), F ′ (x))

is, in characteristic 0, equal to the product of all linear factors taken simply, and in characteristic
p equal to the product of those linear factors x − αk , taken simply, for which the exponent rk in
equation (6) is not divisible by p. Consider the expression

                                         ((φ(x))m , F ′ (x))
                             χm (x) =                                  (m ≥ 1).
                                        ((φ(x))m−1 , F ′ (x))

This is a polynomial composed of factors x − αk , and in characteristic p it can contain only those
factors x − αk for which rk is not divisible by p. Assuming this, in characteristic p, for rk , if
rk < m, both numerator and denominator of χm (x) contain the factor x − αk exactly rk times.
If rk ≥ m, then x − αk occurs in the numerator m times and in the denominator (m − 1) times.
Therefore χm (x) is the product of those linear factors x − αk for which rk ≥ m, and which in
characteristic p are not divisible by p. Hence

                                              χm (x)
                                                      = fm (x),
                                             χm+1 (x)

provided the characteristic is not p with m divisible by p.
   This proves theorems 5 and 6. In the case f = 0, theorem 7 coincides with theorem 6. We
prove theorem 7 by induction, assuming that it has been proved for every m which contains the
prime p as a factor fewer than f times. Then those factors (fm (x))m in which m is not divisible
by π = pf are already known to belong to the field K and to have been determined. Dividing
both sides of (7) by these factors, we obtain an equation of the form

                                  Φ(x) = (fπ (x))π · (f2π (x))2π · · · ,                               (8)

where Φ(x) is a known function from K. Let

                           Φ(x) = (x − β1 )ϱ1 π (x − β2 )ϱ2 π · · · (x − βλ )ϱλ π                      (9)

be the decomposition of Φ(x) into powers of distinct linear factors, and let m = µπ, where µ no
longer contains the factor p. The functions (fkπ (x))π are polynomials in xπ (theorem 4a), and
the same is therefore true of Φ(x). If we put

                     xπ = y,    βkπ = γk ,     (fkπ (x))π = gk (y),      Φ(x) = G(y),


                                                    28
Ernst Steinitz                                                                 Algebraic Theory of Fields


then equations (8) and (9) pass into

                               G(y) = g1 (y) · (g2 (y))2 · (g3 (y))3 · · · ,                         (10)

                            G(y) = (y − γ1 )ϱ1 (y − γ2 )ϱ2 · · · (y − γλ )ϱλ ,                       (11)
where G(y) is a known function from K. The roots γ1 , γ2 , . . . , γλ are distinct; for from γk = γl
would follow
                            0 = γk − γl = βkπ − βlπ = (βk − βl )π ,
                                      0 = βk − βl ,       βk = βl ,
although β1 , β2 , . . . , βλ were assumed distinct. The function gµ (y) is the product of those linear
factors y − γl , taken simply, for which ϱl = µ. Since by hypothesis µ is not divisible by p, theorem
6 gives that gµ (y) is a function in K and can be determined rationally. Putting xπ back for y in
gµ (y), we obtain, since m = µπ,
                                            gµ (y) = (fm (x))π ,
which proves theorem 7.
   Thus in all cases (fm (x))m is a function in K and can be determined rationally. Dividing the
degree of this function by m, we obtain the number of m-fold roots of the function F (x).


§ 11. Perfect and imperfect fields.
In § 7 it was shown that a number of theorems of Galois theory hold in every field. But if this
theory is to hold in a field K unchanged in all its basic outlines, one still needs the theorem that
a polynomial irreducible in K can have only simple roots. This theorem, however, does not hold
in full generality, and we are thus compelled to make a distinction, expressed by the following
definition:
    A field K is called perfect if every polynomial f (x) from K which has multiple roots (in a
suitable extension field) is reducible in K; it is called imperfect if there are irreducible functions
in K with multiple roots.
   We obtain the simple criteria:
   1. Every field of characteristic 0 is perfect.
    2. Among fields whose characteristic is a prime number p, there are perfect and imperfect
fields; such a field is perfect if extraction of the p-th root (which here turns out to be a unique
operation) can always be carried out in it, and otherwise imperfect.
    For the proof we first observe that in a field K of characteristic p there can never be more
than one p-th root, and hence never more than one pf -th root, of an element γ. For if, for two
elements α, β, one has αp = β p = γ, then (compare p. 217, lines 17–19) 0 = αp − β p = (α − β)p ,
hence α − β = 0, α = β. No extension of K can alter this, since the characteristic remains p. The
           f
function xp − γ is therefore, in K or in an extension field in which it decomposes completely, the
pf -th power of a linear factor:
                                         f                 f
                                       xp − γ = (x − δ)p ,
which also follows from § 10, 4a. The prime field Pp (§ 4) gives the simplest example of a field in
which extraction of p-th roots can always be carried out. For by Fermat’s theorem, every element
                                   √
of Pp satisfies ap = a, hence also p a = a. Now let K be any field of characteristic p; we extend
it by adjoining a transcendental element u to obtain Ω = K(u). If α is an element of Ω, then
either α is an element of K, in which case the same holds for αp , or α does not belong to K; then,
considered as a rational function of u, α has a definite degree > 0, and the degree of αp is p
times this degree (§ 5, 6). In no case can αp = u. Thus the element u of the field Ω has no p-th

                                                    29
Ernst Steinitz                                                                     Algebraic Theory of Fields


root in Ω. Now let K again be any field of characteristic p, and let γ be any element of K. Then
                   f
for the function xp − γ, either in K itself or in an extension field, one has the decomposition
                                              f                    f
                                           xp − γ = (x − δ)p .                                            (1)
                        f
If one decomposes xp − γ in K itself into irreducible factors, then all these factors are powers
of x − δ, and all must have the same exponent, since otherwise a factor with larger exponent
would be divisible by one with smaller exponent and hence would not be irreducible. The factor
irreducible in K therefore has the form
                                                    r        r         r
                                          (x − δ)p = xp − δ p ,                                           (2)

where 0 ≤ r ≤ f . The case r = 0 occurs when δ, that is, the pf -th root of γ, belongs to the
field K. But if the p-th (and hence also the pf -th) root of γ is not present in K, then r > 0, and
        r     r
then xp − δ p is an irreducible function in K with pr > 1 equal roots. The field K is therefore
imperfect.
   Now suppose that K either has characteristic 0, or has characteristic p but contains the p-th
root of each of its elements. If f (x) is then a polynomial of degree n in K which has multiple
roots, then
                                            (f (x), f ′ (x))
is at least of degree 1. If f ′ (x) is different from 0, then the degree of (f (x), f ′ (x)), like that of
f ′ (x), is smaller than n; hence f (x) is reducible. If, however, f ′ (x) = 0, which can occur only
when the characteristic is a prime p, then f (x) is a polynomial in xp :

                              f (x) = a0 + a1 xp + · · · + aν xνp          (νp = n),

and it follows that                                                    p
                                          √  √                  √
                                f (x) = a0 + p a1 x + · · · + p aν xν ,
                                          p

                                       √ √                 √
where by our hypothesis the elements p a0 , p a1 , . . . , p aν belong to the field K; thus in this case
too f (x) is reducible in K. This proves theorems 1 and 2.
    Of the theorems of ordinary Galois theory which do not hold without exception in all fields,
we single out two which, as will be shown later, are most closely connected with one another and
may be called the theorem of primitive elements and the theorem of intermediate fields. The
first says that every finite extension is simple; the second says that between a field K and a finite
extension Ω of it there are always only finitely many fields. The converse of the latter theorem
holds without exception, as is easy to see:
    3. If between a field K and its extension field Ω there lie only finitely many fields, then Ω is
finite with respect to K.
   First, Ω cannot contain an element x that is transcendental over K; for otherwise one would
have infinitely many fields

                                  K(x), K(x2 ), K(x3 ), . . . , K(xn ), . . . ,

which are all distinct, as one sees at once (for example from § 5, 6), and lie between K and Ω.
By § 2, 3, every element of Ω belongs to a field Ki between K and Ω which is obtained from
K by adjoining a system Si of finitely many elements. By hypothesis, however, there are only
finitely many such fields. Let them be denoted by K1 , K2 , . . . , Kn ; let Si (i = 1, . . . , n) be a finite
system of elements for which K(Si ) = Ki ; and let S be the finite system containing all elements
of the systems Si . Then K(S) contains all the fields Ki , and hence K(S) = Ω. Since, moreover,
the elements of S are finite in number and, as we saw, algebraic over K, it follows (§ 7, 6) that
K(S) = Ω is finite over K.

                                                        30
Ernst Steinitz                                                                            Algebraic Theory of Fields


    The theorem of primitive elements in ordinary Galois theory rests on the following theorem,
valid for all fields:
    4. If the field Ω is obtained from its subfield K by adjoining finitely many elements α, β, γ, . . .,
each of which satisfies over K an equation with only simple roots, then Ω is simple over K and
can also be obtained from K by adjoining one element which likewise satisfies over K an equation
with only simple roots.
    It is of course enough to prove the assertion for the case in which Ω is first derived from K by
adjoining two elements α, β; repeating the same argument then gives the same result for any finite
number. We give the proof here under the hypothesis that K contains infinitely many elements;
for the case of a field with finitely many elements a different proof will appear below (§ 15, 9).
Let f (x) and g(x) be polynomials from K which vanish for x = α and x = β, respectively, and
which decompose in a suitable extension field M into pairwise distinct linear factors. Let the
decompositions be
                               f (x) = (x − α1 )(x − α2 ) · · · (x − αm ),
                                 g(x) = (x − β1 )(x − β2 ) · · · (x − βn ),
where α1 and β1 are put for α and β. By our hypothesis the elements α1 , α2 , . . . , αm are all
distinct, and likewise β1 , β2 , . . . , βn . If µ is any element of K, then α + µβ is an element of
K(α, β) = Ω. Consider the m · n elements αi + µβk . If two of them, αi + µβk and αr + µβs , are
equal without i = r and k = s both holding, then βk =         ̸ βs , since otherwise k = s, αi = αr , and
i = r would follow. Thus in this case one obtains
                                                      αr − αi
                                                 µ=           .                                        (3)
                                                      βk − βs
Since only finitely many elements can be represented in this form, while K contains infinitely
many, we can and shall choose an element µ from K which is not of the form (3), and we fix
it for what follows. Let now δ = δ1 be an arbitrary element of K(α, β), hence a polynomial
χ(α, β) = χ(α1 , β1 ) in α and β with coefficients from K. We denote by

                                   γ1 , γ2 , . . . , γmn ,        δ1 , δ2 , . . . , δmn

the elements of M which arise from

                               γ = γ1 = α + µβ,                   δ = δ1 = χ(α, β)

when all possible combinations αi , βk are substituted for α, β, and form the function

                                h(x) = (x − γ1 )(x − γ2 ) · · · (x − γmn ).

By the preceding, the elements γ1 , γ2 , . . . , γmn are all distinct, so
                                    h(x)          h(x)                       h(x)
                                          ,             ,         ...,
                                   x − γ1        x − γ2                    x − γmn
are polynomials in x; the first takes at x = γ1 the nonzero value h′ (γ1 ) (where h′ (x) denotes
the derivative of h(x)), while the others vanish at x = γ1 . The function h(x) is symmetric in
α1 , . . . , αm and in β1 , . . . , βn , hence is a function in K; therefore h′ (x) is also a function in K.
Finally, the function
                                    h(x)        h(x)                 h(x)
                          φ(x) =          δ1 +        δ2 + · · · +         δmn                                   (4)
                                   x − γ1      x − γ2              x − γmn
is also symmetric in α1 , . . . , αm and in β1 , . . . , βn , and hence a function in K. Setting x = γ1 = γ
in (4), one obtains
                                                                     φ(γ)
                                     φ(γ) = h′ (γ) · δ,          δ= ′      ,
                                                                     h (γ)

                                                             31
Ernst Steinitz                                                                   Algebraic Theory of Fields


from which it follows that δ belongs to the field K(γ). Since γ belongs to K(α, β) and δ is an
arbitrary element of K(α, β), it follows that

                                             K(α, β) = K(γ).

Moreover, the equation h(x) = 0 satisfied by γ over the field K has only simple roots. Thus
theorem 4 is proved.
    If K is a perfect field, then the irreducible equations in K satisfied by α and β have only
simple roots; the hypotheses imposed on α and β in theorem 4 therefore always hold in this case.
It follows from § 7, 6: 5. Every finite extension of a perfect field is simple.
    To show now that neither the theorem of primitive elements nor the theorem of intermediate
fields is valid without restriction, we prove here the following theorem, which will be needed later
in the more detailed investigations of this subject:
    6. Let K be a field of characteristic p, and let Ω be an extension of K. Suppose that the p-th
power of every element of Ω is contained in K, but that [Ω : K] > p (provided Ω is finite over K
at all). Then Ω is not a simple extension, and there lie infinitely many fields between K and Ω.
    Proof. The first assertion is immediate: the degree of a primitive element would have to be
[Ω : K] > p, whereas the hypothesis implies that every element of Ω satisfies an equation of degree
p over K. For the second assertion, it follows first from the hypothesis that K is an imperfect
field; otherwise the elements of Ω, which are p-th roots of elements of K, would all belong to K,
so that [Ω : K] = 1. It follows further that K contains infinitely many elements, because all fields
with only finitely many elements are perfect (see § 12, 2). Let α be any element contained in Ω
but not in K. Then α is a root of the function xp − αp of the field K, which is irreducible in this
field. K(α) is a field between K and Ω and is different from Ω, since [K(α) : K] = p. Let β be
an element belonging to Ω but not to K(α). Then also [K(β) : K] = p, and K(α) and K(β) are
distinct. Let µ1 , µ2 , . . . , µk , . . . be infinitely many nonzero elements of K, all distinct from one
another. Then all elements ωk = α + µk β belong to Ω, but none belongs to K. For if ωk belonged
to K, then α = ωk − µk β would belong to K(β), which cannot be the case, since α and β have
the same degree over K, and K(α) and K(β) are distinct. The fields K(ωk ) all lie between K and
Ω, have degree p over K, and are all distinct. For from K(ωk ) = K(ωl ) it would follow that
                                      µl ωk − µk ωl                  ωl − ωk
                                α=                      and β =
                                         µl − µk                     µ l − µk

belong to the field K(ωk ) = K(ωl ), and hence are primitive elements of this field over K. But then
K(α) = K(ωk ) = K(β), whereas K(α) and K(β) have already been shown to be distinct. Thus
infinitely many fields K(ωk ) lie between K and Ω. This completes the proof of 6.
    It is now easy to show that the hypotheses of theorem 6 can be realized by finite extensions. For
this purpose we adjoin two transcendental elements t, u to an arbitrary field M of characteristic
p and consider, besides the field Ω = M(t, u), the fields K = M(tp , up ) and K′ = M(t, up ). Then
neither t occurs in K nor u in K′ , and therefore the function xp − tp is irreducible in K and the
function xp − up is irreducible in K′ , whence

                          [Ω : K] = [K′ : K] · [Ω : K′ ] = [t : K] · [u : K′ ] = p2 .

On the other hand, if v is any element of Ω = M(t, u) and we write it in the form v = vv12 , where
v1 and v2 belong to the integral domain M[t, u], then v1 and v2 are sums of terms of the form
ctm un , where c is an element of M. Thus v1p and v2p are sums of terms of the form cp tmp unp
                                                                                        vp
(§ 10, (4’)), and so belong to the integral domain M[tp , up ]. Therefore v p = v1p is an element of
                                                                                  2
the field K = M(tp , up ). Hence the extension Ω of the field K, although finite, is not simple, and
there are infinitely many fields between K and Ω.


                                                      32
Ernst Steinitz                                                               Algebraic Theory of Fields


                                                    § 12.
     Imperfect fields: smallest containing and largest contained perfect field. –
                                     Root-fields.

   Let K be a field of characteristic p, and let a and b be elements of K. Then the equations

                             ap + bp = (a + b)p , ap − bp = (a − b)p ,
                                                                                                   (1.)
                             ap · bp = (a · b)p ,      ap : bp = (a : b)p

hold. From these equations we read off the following result:
   1. The p-th powers of all elements of a field K of characteristic p form a field Kp . If the field
K is perfect, then Kp is identical with K; otherwise it is only a part of K (§ 11, 2.). One obtains
an isomorphic relation between K and Kp by assigning to each element of K its p-th power.
   Since the isomorphic relation between K and Kp is one-to-one, if K has only finitely many
elements, then necessarily Kp = K. Thus:
   2. Every field which has only finitely many elements is perfect.
   Starting from a field K of characteristic p, we form the infinite sequence of fields
                                           0           2          f
                                  K = Kp , K p , Kp , . . . , Kp , . . . ,
            f                                                                                      f −1
in which Kp denotes, in general, the field consisting of the p-th powers of the elements of Kp ,
hence of the pf -th powers of the elements of K. All these fields are isomorphic, and therefore
                                                                            2
either all are perfect or all are imperfect. In the first case K = Kp = Kp = · · · ; in the second
case, which alone interests us here, each following field is only a part of the preceding one. We
can also continue this sequence in the opposite direction. To do so, we must first extend the field
               −1                                                              −1
K to a field Kp such that K consists of the p-th powers of all elements of Kp . For this purpose
                                                                     √
we first observe √
                 that every element of K can be written in the form p a, where a is an element of
        √
Kp . If p a and p b are any two elements of K, then, as is immediately seen from (1.),
                                 √              √
                            1) p a is equal to p b if and only if a = b,
                                 √    √      √
                            2) p a + p b = p a + b,
                                 √ √        √
                            3) p a · p b = p a · b.
                            −1                                             √
We now form a system Kp by adjoining to K all symbols of the form p a in which a denotes an
element belonging to K but not to Kp , without at first assigning to such a symbol the meaning of
a p-th root of a. We further prescribe that, even when the elements a, b of K do not belong to
Kp , or when one of these elements does not belong to Kp , the statements made under 1), 2), 3)
                                                                                −1
are to hold for equality, sum, and product. In this way we have made Kp into a system with
double composition. From 1), 2), 3) it further follows that we obtain an isomorphic relation
                      −1                                                     √         −1           −1
between K and Kp by assigning to each element a of K the element p a of Kp ; hence Kp ,
like K, is a field. If we now apply the rules of calculation valid in every field, then with reference
to 3) we obtain                              √        √
                                           ( p a)p = p ap .
                                                        √
But since the element√ap belongs to Kp , the symbol p ap already has the meaning of a p-th root
of ap , and therefore p ap = a; hence         √
                                             ( p a)p = a.
                          √
Thus the meaning of p a as a p-th root of a is established generally, and at the same time it is
                                                                       −1
established that K consists of the p-th powers of the elements of Kp . Repeating the step which
                       −1                                   −1   −2                    n
led us from K to Kp , we obtain a sequence of fields Kp , Kp , . . ., and hence Kp is defined for
every integer n.

                                                     33
Ernst Steinitz                                                              Algebraic Theory of Fields


                                                     n
    3. All elements which occur in the fields Kp belonging to a field K of characteristic p form
                                  n
a field C; likewise, the fields Kp have as their intersection a field D. Both fields C and D are
perfect; more precisely, D is the largest perfect field contained in K, while C proves to be a smallest
perfect extension field of K.
                                          n
     Indeed, of any two of the fields Kp (n ≤ 0), one is always contained in the other. Thus the
totality of all elements occurring in these fields gives a field (§ 2, 2.). If a is an element of this
                              n             n−1
field C and occurs, say, in Kp , then in Kp , and hence in C, there is a p-th root of a. The field
C is therefore perfect. When we call it the smallest perfect extension field of K, this is to mean
that no field different from C between K and C is perfect. For if C′ is a field between K and C, if a
is an element of C not contained in C′ , and if n is the least natural number such that a occurs in
   −n          n                                                                            2   3
Kp , then ap is an element of K, hence also of C′ . If now, among the elements ap , ap , ap , . . .,
   m                                          m
ap is the first one contained in C′ , then ap has no p-th root in C′ , and the field C′ is therefore
imperfect. – Further, if a is an element of the intersection field D and n is an arbitrary integer,
                      n+1                √                 n
then a occurs in Kp , and therefore p a occurs in Kp , that is, in every field of the sequence
   n
Kp , and hence in D. The field D is therefore perfect. Finally, if D′ is any perfect field contained
in K, if a is an arbitrary element of D′ , and if n is an arbitrarily large natural number, then a
                                                                       n                 n
has in D′ a pn -th root b. Then b belongs to K, and hence a = bp belongs to Kp , that is, to
all fields of our sequence, and therefore to D. Thus D′ is contained in D, and D is the largest
perfect field contained in K.
   Let K be an arbitrary field of characteristic p, and let a be an element of K. It determines a
sequence of elements
                                                   2
                                         a, ap , ap , . . . ,
in which each element is a p-th root of the following one. If a p-th root of a exists in K, we can
continue this sequence in the opposite direction without extending the field. Either, for every
                                                                                               −n
natural number n, however large, there exists a pn -th root of a, which we denote by ap , or
                                            −n
there is a largest number n such that ap still exists but has no further p-th root. In the first
case we obtain a sequence of elements extending infinitely in both directions; in the second it has
an initial element. Perfect fields are characterized by having only sequences of the first kind. The
                          n
elements of a sequence ap are either all distinct from one another, or they repeat periodically, in
which case the sequence is of course of the first kind. Here the following simple theorem holds:
                                     n
    4. The sequence of elements ap determined by an element a of a field K of characteristic p is
periodic if and only if the element a is absolutely algebraic. The number of elements in the period
is equal to the absolute degree of a (= degree with respect to the prime field), and the elements of
the period are all the roots of one and the same irreducible equation in the prime field Pp .
   For if the sequence belonging to a is periodic and consists of n different elements, then every
                                                                                        n
element is equal to its pn -th power, and is therefore a solution of the equation xp − x = 0,
whose coefficients belong to the prime field Pp contained in K; hence it is absolutely algebraic.
Conversely, suppose that a is an absolutely algebraic element of K and that

                                 φ(x) = xm + a1 xm−1 + · · · + am = 0                                    (2.)

is the irreducible equation of the prime field which is satisfied by a. Then

                                     am + a1 am−1 + · · · + am = 0.

Raising this equation to the p-th power and taking into account that every element of the prime
field is equal to its p-th power, we obtain

                                   apm + a1 ap(m−1) + · · · + am = 0,
                                                                                                 2   3
that is, equation (2.) is also satisfied by ap . In the same way one sees that the elements ap , ap , . . .
must be solutions of equation (2.), and therefore there are at most m different elements among

                                                    34
Ernst Steinitz                                                                   Algebraic Theory of Fields


                                                                             2        n−1
them. Suppose that there are n different ones, so that a, ap , ap , . . . , ap              are distinct while
  n
ap = a. Then φ(x) is divisible by
                                                  n−1
                 (x − a)(x − ap ) · · · (x − ap         ) = xn + b1 xn−1 + · · · + bn = ψ(x).             (3.)

Raising to the p-th power and then replacing xp by x (which is permissible because xp is
transcendental with respect to K), the factors on the left side of (3.) undergo only a cyclic
permutation. Thus one obtains

                                    ψ(x) = xn + bp1 xn−1 + · · · + bpn ,

and hence bp1 = b1 , . . . , bpn = bn . But the equation xp = x is satisfied by the p elements of the
prime field, and since it can have no more than p roots, it follows that the coefficients of ψ(x)
belong to the prime field. Since φ(x) is divisible by ψ(x) and is irreducible in the prime field, we
must have φ(x) = ψ(x). This proves theorem 4 completely.
   If the field K is absolutely algebraic, then every element of K belongs to a periodic sequence,
and therefore has a p-th root. We thus obtain the following theorem, of which 2. is a special case:
    5. Every absolutely algebraic field is perfect.
    Root-elements and root-fields. – Let K be a field of characteristic p, and let Ω be an extension
                                                                                  n
of K. An element a of Ω is to be called a root-element with respect to K if ap belongs to K for
                                                                              n
sufficiently large n. We then call the least number n ≥ 0 for which ap becomes an element
of K the exponent of a with respect to K. If this exponent is f , then, as is easily seen (see p.
          f       f
219), xp − ap = 0 is the irreducible equation in K which is satisfied by a. We call the field Ω
a root-field with respect to K if all its elements are root-elements. All elements of K itself are
root-elements; they are characterized by exponent 0. If a and b are root-elements and their
                                                              f  f
exponents do not exceed the natural number f , then ap , bp are elements of K, and the same
                                f     f     f                      f        p f
is therefore true of (a ± b)p = ap ± bp , as well as of (a · b)p and ab . Hence the elements
a ± b, a · b, ab are also root-elements, and their exponents are ≤ f . Therefore the root-elements
contained in Ω whose exponent does not exceed f form a field between K and Ω; and the same is
true, as follows at once, of the totality of all root-elements contained in Ω. Further, an extension
Ω which arises by adjoining a finite or infinite system S of root-elements is a root-field. For the
field formed by the root-elements contains K and the system S, and hence is identical with the
field K(S) = Ω. – From the definitions just given it also follows immediately that if the field
Ω lies between K and M, and if Ω is a root-field with respect to K while M is a root-field with
respect to Ω, then M is also a root-field with respect to K. – Now suppose that the extension
field Ω itself, or more generally some field T between K and Ω, is perfect, and denote by C the
field of all root-elements contained in Ω with respect to K. If a is an element of C and f is its
                      f
exponent, then ap belongs to K, hence also to T. But a itself must already belong to T; for
                                                            n                       n
otherwise, if n denoted the least number for which ap belongs to T, then ap would have no
p-th root within T, whereas T was supposed to be a perfect field. Hence a belongs to T, and
so the field C is contained in T. On the other hand, C itself is a perfect field. For if a is again
an element of C and f denotes its exponent, then as an element of T it has, within this perfect
                      √              f +1     f                                                √
field, a p-th root p a = b, and bp        = ap becomes an element of K. Thus the element p a is
a root-element and therefore belongs to C. Hence every extension field Ω of K, if it is perfect,
contains a smallest field of this kind, and this field is formed by all root-elements contained in Ω.
– Now let C be a smallest perfect extension field of K (therefore a root-field), and let Kf (f ≥ 0)
denote the field of those elements of C whose exponent is ≤ f . Then K0 = K. If a is an element
                                  √                               √
of Kf , then the exponent of p a cannot be > f + 1, that is, p a belongs to Kf +1 ; conversely, if
 √
 p
   a belongs to Kf +1 , one may conclude that a is an element of Kf . Hence Kpf +1 = Kf . Let K be a
field of the same type as K, let π0 be an isomorphic relation between K and K, let C be a smallest
perfect extension field of K, and let Kf be the field of those elements of C whose exponent with

                                                         35
Ernst Steinitz                                                                             Algebraic Theory of Fields


respect to K is ≤ f . Then on the one hand we have an isomorphic relation between K1 and
K = K0 , and on the other between K1 and K0 , by assigning to each element of K1 or K1 its p-th
power. From these two isomorphisms, together with π0 , there results an isomorphic relation π1
between K1 and K1 which includes π0 . In the same way we obtain a relation π2 between K2 and
K2 which includes π1 , and so on. The totality of these isomorphisms π0 , π1 , π2 , . . . establishes
an isomorphism between C and C. Here we may again identify K with K and suppose that π0
carries every element of K to itself. Then the following result is obtained:
    6. Every imperfect field can essentially be extended in only one way to a smallest possible
perfect field; and thus to every imperfect type there is assigned a definite perfect type.

                                                       § 13.
                    Imperfect fields: algebraic extensions of the first kind.

    Let K be an arbitrary field. An irreducible function in K shall be called of the first kind if it
has only simple zeros. An element γ algebraic with respect to K shall be called of the first kind
if the irreducible function in K which has γ as a zero is of the first kind. An algebraic extension
shall be called of the first kind if all elements of the extension field are of the first kind.
   For perfect fields, and therefore in particular for all fields of characteristic 0, there are only
functions, algebraic elements, and algebraic extensions of the first kind.
   Let the field K have characteristic p, and let g(x) be an irreducible function in K. We can
                                                                                             f
then determine a non-negative integer f such that g(x) is an integral rational function of xp ,
                   f +1
but no longer of xp . Then g(x) has the form
                                               f               f
                                  g(x) = xnp + a1 x(n−1)p + · · · + an ,

and at least one term whose exponent is not divisible by pf +1 actually occurs. We call the
number n the reduced degree, and f (generalizing a designation introduced in the preceding
section) the exponent of the irreducible function g(x); the same terminology is transferred to the
zeros of the function.13
     Two special cases are especially noteworthy. First, if the reduced degree has its smallest
                                           f
value, 1, then g(x) assumes the form xp − α and has all its zeros equal; the algebraic elements
of reduced degree 1 are therefore the root elements considered in the preceding section. Secondly,
if the exponent f has its smallest value, 0, then g(x) is no longer an integral rational function of
xp , the derivative g ′ (x) does not vanish and therefore cannot have a common factor with g(x);
hence the function g(x) has only simple zeros and is of the first kind. By contrast, in the case
f > 0, g(x) is the p-th power of another integral function and therefore has only multiple zeros.
We shall chiefly be concerned in this section with the case f = 0.
   We now prove a series of propositions concerning a field K of characteristic p; some of these
propositions have significance only when K is imperfect.
    1. If γ is algebraic with respect to K and has exponent f , f > 0, then γ p has exponent f − 1
with respect to K, and [K(γ) : K(γ p )] = p.
       Indeed, if γ is a zero of the irreducible function
                                               f               f
                                  g(x) = xnp + a1 x(n−1)p + · · · + an ,                                         (1.)

then γ p is a zero of
                                             f −1                  f −1
                                h(x) = xnp          + a1 x(n−1)p          + · · · + an .
  13
    The term “reduced degree” is justified by the fact that, as can easily be shown by means of the following
propositions, the reduced degree of an element with respect to K is equal to the degree which the element has
with respect to the smallest perfect field containing K.


                                                        36
Ernst Steinitz                                                            Algebraic Theory of Fields


The function h(x) is irreducible in K, since from h(x) = φ(x) · ψ(x) it would follow that

                                   g(x) = h(xp ) = φ(xp ) · ψ(xp ),

whereas g(x) is irreducible. Thus f − 1 is the exponent of γ p ; and since [γ : K] = npf and
[γ p : K] = npf −1 , it follows that [K(γ) : K(γ p )] = p.
    2. If
                                   φ(x) = xn + a1 xn−1 + · · · + an                               (2.)
is an irreducible function of the first kind in K, then

                                   ψ(x) = xn + ap1 xn−1 + · · · + apn                             (3.)
                          f                 f
(more generally, xn + ap1 xn−1 + · · · + apn ) is also irreducible and of the first kind.
    Proof. Let h(x) denote a factor of ψ(x) belonging to K and having degree greater than 0.
Then h(xp ) is a factor of ψ(xp ) = (φ(x))p , and therefore, since φ(x) is irreducible, it is a power
of φ(x). We thus obtain
                                 h(xp ) = (φ(x))r     (0 < r ≤ p).                                (4.)
But by hypothesis φ(x) has only simple zeros, and hence (φ(x))r has only r-fold zeros; while
h(xp ) is the p-th power of an integral function (of an extension field), and therefore every one of
its zeros has multiplicity at least p. It follows from (4.) that r = p,

                                      h(xp ) = (φ(x))p = ψ(xp ),

and hence
                                            h(x) = ψ(x).
Thus ψ(x) is irreducible. Since φ(x) actually contains at least one power of x whose exponent is
not divisible by p, it follows from (2.) and (3.) that the same is true for ψ(x). Therefore ψ(x) is
of the first kind.
    3. If
                                   φ(x) = xn + a1 xn−1 + · · · + an                               (2.)
is an irreducible function of the first kind in K, and if L is an extension field of K which contains
the p-th roots of the coefficients of φ(x) and one zero γ of φ(x), then L also contains the p-th
root of γ.
    Proof. By hypothesis L contains the two functions
                             √                  √                            √
                χ(x) = xn + p a1 xn−1 + · · · + p an ,         xp − γ = (x − p γ)p ,
                                                                                   √
and therefore also their greatest common divisor t(x). Since γ is a zero of φ(x), p γ is a zero of
φ(xp ) = (χ(x))p , and therefore a zero of χ(x); moreover it is a simple zero, because the zeros of
                                                                                             √
χ(x) are the p-th roots of the zeros of φ(x) and therefore, like them, are distinct. Since p γ is
                                                    √                √
the only zero of xp − γ, it follows that t(x) = x − p γ, and hence p γ is an element of L.
    4. Every algebraic extension of a perfect field is a perfect field.
    Proof. Let K be a perfect field of characteristic p – for characteristic 0 the assertion is
immediate – let L be an algebraic extension of K, let γ be an element of L, and let φ(x) be the
irreducible function in K having γ as a zero. Since K is perfect, φ(x) is of the first kind; and for
the same reason K(γ), just like K itself, contains the p-th roots of the coefficients of φ(x) and, in
                                                            √
addition, contains γ. Therefore, by 3., it also contains p γ. Since K(γ) is a subfield of L, the
p-th root of every element γ of L is contained in L; hence L is a perfect field. – The hypothesis
of Proposition 4. is satisfied when K is a prime field, so that L is an absolutely algebraic field;
this again proves the assertion of § 12, 5.

                                                  37
Ernst Steinitz                                                              Algebraic Theory of Fields


   5. If γ is algebraic with respect to K and is of the first kind, then K(γ p ) = K(γ).
    Indeed, if γ is a zero of the irreducible function φ(x) = xn + a1 xn−1 + · · · + an in K, then γ p
is a zero of the function ψ(x) = xn + ap1 xn−1 + · · · + apn , which is likewise irreducible by 2. Thus
n = [γ : K] = [γ p : K], and the assertion follows. – Conversely, Proposition 1 already says that
from K(γ p ) = K(γ) one may conclude that γ is of the first kind.
    6. If the element γ is algebraic with respect to K and is of the first kind, then K(γ) is an
algebraic extension of the first kind.
   Proof. Let α be an arbitrary element of K(γ), and put
                        (
                           [K(α) : K] = m1 , [K(γ) : K(α)] = m2 ,
                                                                                                      (5.)
                           [K(αp ) : K] = n1 , [K(γ) : K(αp )] = n2 .

Then
                                    m1 · m2 = n1 · n2 = [K(γ) : K],                                   (6.)
and, since K(αp ) is a subfield of K(α),

                                         m 1 ≥ n1 ,        m2 ≤ n2 .                                  (7.)

Now let χ(x) = xm2 + b1 xm2 −1 + · · · + bm2 be the irreducible function of the field K(α) which has
γ as a zero. Then γ p is a zero of xm2 + bp1 xm2 −1 + · · · + bpm2 , and the coefficients of this function
belong, as is easily seen, to the field K(αp ). Hence

                            n2 = [K(γ) : K(αp )] = [K(γ p ) : K(αp )] ≤ m2 .

Consequently, by (7.) and (6.), m2 = n2 and m1 = n1 . The elements α and αp therefore have
the same degree with respect to K. Hence K(αp ) = K(α), so that α is an element of the first kind,
as was to be shown.
   7. Every finite extension of the first kind is simple.
   Indeed, if L is a finite extension of the first kind of K, then we can write L = K(S), where S
contains only finitely many elements (§ 7, 6.); and since all of these are of the first kind, L is
simple with respect to K by § 11, 4.
    8. A field K(S) which arises from K by adjunction of a system S of algebraic elements of the
first kind is an extension of the first kind.
    If S is a finite system, this follows from § 11, 4. and Proposition 6 of this section; if S is
infinite, the same conclusion follows after adding § 2, 3.
    9. If the field L lies between K and M, and if L is of the first kind with respect to K while M
is of the first kind with respect to L, then M is of the first kind with respect to K.
   Proof. Let δ be an arbitrary element of M. By § 7, 9., δ is algebraic with respect to K.
To prove 9. it remains only to show that δ is of the first kind, i.e. has exponent 0, with
                                                                              f
respect to K. Denote the exponent in question first by f . Then by 1. δ p has exponent 0 with
respect to K. With respect to L, δ is of the first kind by hypothesis, whence by 5. we have
                      2                                  f                  f
L(δ) = L(δ p ) = L(δ p ) = · · · , and hence L(δ) = L(δ p ). The field L(δ p ) is obtained from K by
                                           f
adjoining all elements of L as well as δ p . But all these elements are of the first kind with respect
                                                                                     f
to K; hence, by Proposition 8, the same holds for all elements of the field L(δ p ) = L(δ), and in
particular for δ.
   Let K be an arbitrary field, and let L be a finite extension of the first kind of K. Then the
extension is simple, and any primitive element α of L is a zero of an irreducible function φ(x)
in K of the first kind. It may happen that φ(x) already splits completely in L; then we put
N = L. Otherwise, let N denote an extension of L which is just sufficient to split φ(x) completely.

                                                      38
Ernst Steinitz                                                                   Algebraic Theory of Fields


Then N arises from L, and, since L = K(α), also from K, solely by adjunction of zeros of the
function φ(x). It is therefore a finite extension of the first kind of K, and moreover is normal
with respect to K (§ 8, 6.). Thus, if j1 is a primitive element of N (with respect to K) and g(x)
is the irreducible function in K having j1 as a zero, then in N one has a decomposition

                                 g(x) = (x − j1 ) · (x − j2 ) · · · (x − jn ).

Here the elements j1 , j2 , . . . , jn are distinct, and

                          N = K(j1 ) = K(j2 ) = · · · = K(jn ),           [N : K] = n.

Since j1 , j2 , . . . , jn are zeros of the same irreducible function in K, we obtain an isomorphic
relation πk (k = 1, . . . , n) of N with respect to itself, in which every element of K remains
unchanged, by replacing j1 by jk in each element of N, conceived as written in the form

                                        c0 + c1 j1 + · · · + cn−1 j1n−1                                (8.)

with coefficients in K (§ 6). Let the system of these n isomorphisms (the Galois group) be denoted
by G. Now let M be any field between K and N, let [M : K] = m, let β = ψ(j1 ) be a primitive
element of M represented in the form (8.), and let h(x) be the irreducible function in K with zero
β. Since the isomorphisms πk leave the element 0 unchanged and carry β = ψ(j1 ) into ψ(jk ), it
follows from 0 = h(β) = h(ψ(j1 )) that also h(ψ(jk )) = 0. The function

                            f (x) = (x − ψ(j1 )) · (x − ψ(j2 )) · · · (x − ψ(jn ))

belongs to the field K, since its coefficients are symmetric in the zeros jk of g(x); and, by the
preceding argument, all its zeros are zeros of the irreducible function h(x). Thus f (x) can have
no irreducible factor in K other than h(x), and, by considering the degrees of f (x) and h(x), one
obtains
                                          f (x) = h(x)n/m .
Hence among the elements ψ(jk ) exactly n/m are equal to β = ψ(j1 ). Thus among the
isomorphisms πk there are exactly n/m which leave the element β, and therefore every element
of K(β) = M, unchanged. Let H be the system of these n/m isomorphisms. – If M′ is a second
field between K and N, then to M′ there belongs a system H′ consisting of all isomorphisms πk
which leave all elements of M′ unchanged. Suppose that H′ is identical with H. If δ is then an
element of M′ , the isomorphisms belonging to H leave all elements of M and also δ unchanged,
and hence also all elements of the field M(δ) unchanged. If

                                              [M(δ) : M] = µ,

then [M(δ) : K] = m · µ. By the preceding argument, therefore, the number of isomorphisms
πk which leave all elements of M(δ) unchanged is n/(m · µ). Since all n/m isomorphisms of H
belong to them, it follows that µ = 1, M(δ) = M, and hence δ is an element of M. Since δ
denoted an arbitrary element of M′ , M′ is therefore a part of M; and since the converse can
be proved in the same way, M = M′ . Thus different fields M between K and N correspond to
different subsystems H of the system G. Since the number of subsystems of G is finite, only
finitely many fields lie between K and N, and hence also between K and L. That is:
    10. Between a field K and a finite extension L of the first kind there lie only finitely many
fields.
    Moreover, since for perfect fields all algebraic extensions are of the first kind, we obtain:
    11. Between a perfect field and a finite extension of it there lie only finitely many fields.



                                                      39
Ernst Steinitz                                                           Algebraic Theory of Fields


                                                 § 14.
Imperfect fields: arbitrary algebraic extensions, the theorem of primitive elements,
                       and the theorem of intermediate fields.

    According to § 11, 5. and § 13, 11., the theorems named in the heading hold for every perfect
field. But there are certain imperfect fields in which these theorems still hold. For a closer
investigation of the questions connected with this, after having studied in §§ 12 and 13 two special
kinds of algebraic extensions, namely root fields and extensions of the first kind, we must now
consider arbitrary algebraic extensions. First it appears that every such extension is composed
in a definite way from two special ones.
    1. If L is an algebraic extension of the imperfect field K, then there is between K and L a
definite field L0 with the following property: L0 is of the first kind with respect to K, and L is a
root field with respect to L0 . The field L0 consists of all elements of L which are of the first kind
with respect to K.
    Indeed, let L0 denote the system of all elements of the first kind in L. Then, by § 13, 8., the
field K(L0 ) contains only elements of the first kind, and is therefore identical with L0 ; thus L0 is
a field between K and L. Further, if δ is any element of L and f is its exponent with respect to K,
        f
then δ p is of the first kind, hence is an element of L0 , and consequently δ is a root element of L0 .
This field L0 is the only one having the properties required in 1. For if L′0 has these properties,
and if the element δ of L is of the first kind with respect to K, then δ is also of the first kind with
respect to L′0 ; and since δ is at the same time to be a root element of L′0 , δ must itself belong to
the field L′0 . Hence L′0 must contain all elements of the first kind, and so is identical with L0 .
    2. If L is an algebraic extension of the imperfect field K, and f is an integer ≥ 0, then the
system Lf of those elements of L whose exponent is ≤ f is a field (between K and L).
    This is first true for L0 by Proposition 1. Next, the requirement that an element a of L have
                                                          f
exponent ≤ f is equivalent to the requirement that ap have exponent 0, and therefore be an
                                                               f       f
element of L0 . Thus, if a and b are elements of Lf , then ap and bp , and hence also the sum,
                                        f        f
difference, product, and quotient of ap and bp , are elements of L0 . But these combinations are
the pf -th powers of a + b, a − b, ab, and a/b. Therefore these four elements again belong to the
system Lf , and this system is a field.
   3. If to an imperfect field K one adjoins a system S of algebraic elements whose exponents do
not exceed the number f , then the exponents of all elements of K(S) are ≤ f .
    For let S′ denote the system of all elements of K(S) whose exponents are ≤ f . By 2. S′ is a
field; and since all elements of K and of S occur in S′ , we have S′ = K(S).
     Exponent and reduced degree of a finite extension. – Let L be a finite extension of an imperfect
field K. Then there is an integer f ≥ 0 such that L contains elements of exponent f , but none of
larger exponent. We call the number f the exponent of L (with respect to K). Further, if L0 is
the subfield of L formed by the elements of the first kind, and if [L0 : K] = n, then we call the
number n the reduced degree of L (with respect to K). – Now if δ is an element of L of exponent
f , then, among the powers
                                                     2             f
                                         δ, δ p , δ p , . . . , δ p ,
only the last has exponent 0, and is therefore an element of L0 . Hence [L0 (δ) : K] = n · pf , so
that n · pf divides [L : K]. Further, if η is an arbitrary element of L, with reduced degree n1 and
                                              f                                                   f
exponent f1 , then f1 ≤ f . The element η p 1 belongs to L0 , and n1 is equal to the degree of η p 1 ,
hence is a divisor of n. Since n1 · pf1 is the degree of η, it follows that:
    4. If L is a finite extension of the imperfect field K, with reduced degree n and exponent f ,
then the degree of L (with respect to K) is a multiple, and the degree of each element of L is a
divisor, of the number n · pf .


                                                  40
Ernst Steinitz                                                                       Algebraic Theory of Fields


    If L is a simple extension, then the primitive elements have the same degree as L itself; by
4. this degree must therefore be equal to n · pf , and in that case f is the exponent and n the
reduced degree of every primitive element.
    Let L again denote a finite, not necessarily simple extension of the imperfect field K, and let
L0 , n, and f retain their earlier meanings. In L there are elements of exponent f , and likewise
elements of reduced degree n: for the field L0 is of the first kind and therefore has primitive
elements. The degree of such an element is n, and since it is of the first kind, n is also its reduced
degree. The question is whether one can always find in L an element which is simultaneously
of exponent f and of reduced degree n. For understanding the structure of finite extensions it
is important to show that such elements always exist. Thus, in supplement to 4., we shall now
prove:
   5. If L is a finite extension of the imperfect field K, with reduced degree n and exponent f ,
then there exist in L elements of degree n · pf .
      We first observe that the field K, since it is imperfect, has infinitely many elements. In such a
field K the following proposition holds: in a non-zero integral function F of n indeterminates
t0 , t1 , . . . , tn−1 one can substitute elements of K for these indeterminates in such a way that the
resulting element of K is also ̸= 0. This is shown in the usual way, first for n = 1, using the fact
that infinitely many values are available while the number of zeros is at most equal to the degree
of the function, and then in general by induction from n to n + 1. – We now make use of this
fact. Returning to the previous notation, choose from the field L0 a primitive element γ, from
                                                                                             f
the field L an element δ of exponent f (if f = 0, any non-zero element δ), and put δ p = η.
   Of the powers
                                                              f
                                             δ, δ p , . . . , δ p = η                                      (1.)
the last is then the only one which belongs to L0 . The elements

                                             ε, γ, γ 2 , . . . , γ n−1                                     (2.)

form a basis of L0 ; and since γ is of the first kind and
                                                                  2              f
                            L0 = K(γ) = K(γ p ) = K(γ p ) = · · · = K(γ p ),
           f
so that γ p is a primitive element of L0 , and since η ̸= 0, the elements
                                              f         f                f
                                     η, ηγ p , ηγ 2p , . . . , ηγ (n−1)p                                   (3.)

also form a basis of L0 . We now introduce 2n indeterminates t0 , . . . , tn−1 ; u0 , . . . , un−1 and form
the two linear forms
                              ξ = t0 + γt1 + γ 2 t2 + · · · + γ n−1 tn−1 ,                               (4.)
                                         f              f                        f
                         ζ = ηu0 + ηγ p u1 + ηγ 2p u2 + · · · + ηγ (n−1)p un−1 .                           (5.)
Both ξ and ζ represent every element of L0 once, as the t’s respectively the u’s range over all
elements of K. For every non-negative integer k, ζ k represents an integral homogeneous function
of the indeterminates u with coefficients from L0 . Express these coefficients in the basis (3.) and
then arrange the expression according to the elements of this basis. We obtain
                                                  f                          f
                           ζ k = ηAk0 + ηγ p Ak1 + · · · + ηγ (n−1)p Ak,n−1 .                              (6.)

Here the A’s are integral homogeneous functions of the u’s with coefficients in K, and the same
is true of the determinant
                                |Akl |   (k, l = 0, . . . , n − 1).



                                                       41
Ernst Steinitz                                                                   Algebraic Theory of Fields


If arbitrary elements of K are substituted for the indeterminates u, then ζ becomes an element of
L0 and |Akl | an element of K; it is equal to 0 precisely when the elements

                                            ε, ζ, ζ 2 , . . . , ζ n−1

become linearly dependent (with respect to K). But since the u’s can be chosen so that ζ
is primitive, |Akl |, considered as a function of the indeterminates u, is not zero. Therefore
|Akl | passes into a non-zero function ∆ of the indeterminates t0 , . . . , tn−1 when u0 , . . . , un−1 are
                f            f
replaced by tp0 , . . . , tpn−1 . After this substitution, as is clear from (4.) and (5.),
                                                                f
                                                  ζ = ηξ p .                                           (7.)

Now substitute for t0 , . . . , tn−1 elements of K for which ∆ ̸= 0 (and in the case n = 1 assume
                       f
t0 ̸= 0). Then ζ = ηξ p is a primitive element, and ξ a non-zero element, of L0 . The element δξ
of L has exponent f : for, since among the elements (1.) only the last belongs to the field L0 ,
while ξ is an element of L0 , among the powers
                                                            f       f        f
                                      δξ, δ p ξ p , . . . , δ p ξ p = ηξ p                             (8.)

again only the last is an element of L0 , and hence of the first kind. Moreover, the elements (8.)
                                                f
all have the same reduced degree; and since ηξ p is a primitive element of L0 , the reduced degree
of δξ is equal to n. Therefore the degree of δξ is n · pf , and 5. is proved.
   From 5. and § 7, 5. we immediately obtain:
   I. A finite extension L of an imperfect field K is simple if and only if [L : K] = n · pf , where n
denotes the reduced degree and f the exponent of L.
   Let L again be an arbitrary finite extension of the imperfect field K, and let M be a field
between K and L. Let n and m denote the reduced degrees of the fields L and M, and let f and
g denote their exponents. Then g ≤ f and

                                              [M : K] ≥ mpg .                                          (9.)

Further, for each non-negative integer r, let Lr respectively Mr denote the field of those elements
of L respectively M whose exponents are ≤ r, so that

                                         Lf = L,            Mg = M,

                                   [L0 : K] = n,            [M0 : K] = m,
and every field Mr is a subfield of Lr . The field L0 is of the first kind with respect to K, hence
also with respect to M0 , and therefore is simple. A primitive element γ of L0 is thus a zero of an
irreducible function φ(x) in M0 of degree n/m and of the first kind. But the function φ(x) is
also irreducible in the field M = Mg . For if in M we had a decomposition

                                           φ(x) = χ(x) · ψ(x),                                        (10.)

and if φ(x), χ(x), ψ(x) denote the functions obtained from φ(x), χ(x), ψ(x) by replacing each
coefficient by its pg -th power, then (10.) would imply

                                           φ(x) = χ(x) · ψ(x).                                        (11.)

Since the exponent of every element of M is ≤ g, its pg -th power is contained in M0 ; hence by
(11.) φ(x) would be reducible in the field M0 . This, however, contradicts § 13, 2. Thus φ(x) is
also irreducible in M, and consequently [γ : M] = n/m; with (9.) this gives
                                                     n
                                   [M(γ) : K] =        [M : K] ≥ n · pg .                             (12.)
                                                     m

                                                       42
Ernst Steinitz                                                                     Algebraic Theory of Fields


Since M has exponent g and γ exponent 0, it follows by 3. that M(γ) has exponent g, and is
therefore a part of the field Lg , which contains all elements of L whose exponents are ≤ g. –
The field L contains elements of exponent f , hence elements of every exponent ≤ f (§ 13, 1.).
Therefore, among the fields
                                       L0 , L1 , . . . , Lf = L,
each preceding one is only a part of the following one.
   Assume now that L is simple with respect to K. Then by I, [L : K] = n · pf and [L : L0 ] = pf ;
hence
                           [Lr+1 : Lr ] = p,    (r = 0, . . . , f − 1)
and
                                                 [Lg : K] = n · pg .                                         (13.)
But since M(γ) is a subfield of Lg , (12.) and (13.) imply
                                             n
                         M(γ) = Lg ,           [M : K] = n · pg ,       [M : K] = m · pg .
                                             m
By I this says that M is a simple extension of K. Thus we have the theorem:
    II. If L is a simple algebraic14 extension of K, then every field between K and L is also simple
with respect to K.
    The field M contains only those elements of L whose pg -th power belongs to M0 , but it must
also contain all these elements. For these elements first form a field M′ (see Proposition 2.)
                                                                                       g
between M and L, and by II M′ must contain a primitive element δ. Since then δ p belongs to
M0 , we have [M′ : K] = [δ : M0 ] · [M0 : K] ≤ pg · m, hence M′ = M. Every field M between K
and L is therefore uniquely determined by the field M0 of its elements of the first kind and by
its exponent g. Now g ≤ f , and for M0 , since it lies between K and L0 and L0 is an extension of
the first kind, only finitely many fields can occur by § 13, 10. Hence only finitely many fields can
lie between K and L.
    We now drop the hypothesis that the finite extension L is simple, but instead assume that
the number of fields between K and L is finite. Since the p-th power of every element of Lr
(0 < r ≤ f ) belongs to Lr−1 , [Lr : Lr−1 ] cannot be > p; otherwise, contrary to our hypothesis,
there would already be infinitely many fields between Lr−1 and Lr (§ 11, 6.). Since, on the other
hand, Lr−1 is only a part of Lr , we have [Lr : Lr−1 ] = p, and therefore

                                     [L : K] = [Lf : L0 ] · [L0 : K] = n · pf ,

which says that L is simple with respect to K. Taking account of the earlier results (§ 11, 3., §
11, 5., § 13, 11.), this proves:
    III. In order that only finitely many fields lie between an arbitrary field K and an extension L
of it, it is necessary and sufficient that L be algebraic and simple with respect to K.
       Finally we prove:
    IV. The theorem of primitive elements and the theorem of intermediate fields (§ 11) hold,
besides for perfect fields, also for those imperfect fields K of characteristic p which are finite over
Kp and of degree p. They do not hold for the other imperfect fields.
    First suppose that the stated theorems hold for the imperfect field K of characteristic p, and
                                            −1
form, as in § 12, the extension field L = Kp so that Lp = K. If a is then an element not belonging
to K, and b an arbitrary element of L, then [K(a) : K] = p, but also [K(a, b) : K] = p. For if
[K(a, b) : K] > p, then, since the p-th powers of all elements of K(a, b) belong to K, infinitely many
fields would lie between K and K(a, b) by § 11, 6., and the extension would not be simple. Since
  14
       Exactly the same is also true, however, for simple transcendental extensions (Lüroth’s theorem; see § 24).


                                                         43
Ernst Steinitz                                                                 Algebraic Theory of Fields


this contradicts our assumption, [K(a, b) : K] = p = [K(a) : K]; the element b therefore belongs to
K(a). Since b was an arbitrary element of L, we have L = K(a); hence [L : K] = [K(a) : K] = p,
and, because L is isomorphic to K, also [K : Kp ] = p.
    Conversely, suppose that [K : Kp ] = p, and let L be any finite extension of K, with exponent
f and reduced degree n. If Lr has the earlier meaning, and if to each element of Lr in Lpr we
assign its p-th power, we obtain an isomorphic relation between Lr and Lpr , in which K is mapped
isomorphically onto Kp . From this it follows at once that

                                          [Lr : K] = [Lpr : Kp ],

and hence
                 [Lr : Lpr ] · [Lpr : Kp ] = [Lr : Kp ] = [Lr : K] · [K : Kp ] = p[Lr : K],
so that
                                              [Lr : Lpr ] = p.                                      (14.)
Let now 0 < r ≤ f . Then Lr−1 is only a part of Lr ; on the other hand, the p-th power of every
element of Lr belongs to Lr−1 , that is, Lr−1 lies between Lpr and Lr . From (14.) it follows that
Lr−1 = Lpr , and therefore
                                         [Lr : Lr−1 ] = p.
Consequently
                                 [L : K] = [Lf : L0 ] · [L0 : K] = npf .
This equality expresses precisely that L is simple with respect to K, as was to be shown.




                                                    44
Ernst Steinitz                                                            Algebraic Theory of Fields


§ 15.
Finite fields.
By a finite field we mean a field with only finitely many elements. If K is a finite field, then
the prime field P contained in K is also finite; hence the characteristic of K is a prime number.
Moreover K must be finite with respect to its prime field. Conversely, suppose that K has
characteristic p and is finite with respect to its prime field Pp = P, say [K : P] = n, and that the
elements a1 , . . . , an form a basis of K with respect to P. Then every element of K is represented
once in the form
                                         c1 a1 + c2 a2 + · · · + cn an ,
when c1 , . . . , cn are allowed to range over all elements of the prime field. Thus K consists of
pn elements. Consequently the number of elements of a finite field is always a prime power.
Conversely, let an arbitrary prime power pn be given, and form, from the prime field Pp , an
                                                     n
extension just sufficient to split the function xp − x completely. In the extension field K the
              n                                                          n
function xp − x has pn distinct zeros, because its derivative is pn xp −1 − ε = −ε, and hence
                             n                                                   n
is relatively prime to xp − x. If, moreover, a and b are any two zeros of xp − x, then from
   n         n
ap = a, bp = b it follows that
                                                n   n        n
                                     (a ± b)p = ap ± bp = a ± b,
                     n               p n                                      n
and likewise (a · b)p = a · b and ab      = ab ; this says that the zeros of xp − x form a field with
pn elements. Conversely, if K is a finite field with pn elements, then p is its characteristic and n
its degree with respect to the prime field. The field K is absolutely algebraic, and likewise every
element a of K is absolutely algebraic; its absolute degree m is a divisor of n. By § 12, 4., the
sequence
                                                       2
                                            a, ap , ap , . . .
consists of a period of m distinct elements; hence for every exponent f divisible by m one has
  f                            n
ap = a, and therefore also ap = a. Thus the pn elements of K are the zeros of the function
  n
xp − x, and K is an extension of the prime field which is just sufficient to split the function
  n
xp − x completely. But since all extensions of a field which are just sufficient for the complete
decomposition of a given function are equivalent, all fields with pn elements are isomorphic. We
have therefore obtained:
    1. The number of elements of a finite field is a prime power, and every prime power pn gives
the number of elements for one and only one1 field type; p is its characteristic and n its absolute
degree.
      We shall denote this type by Cp,n .
   In order that a field K of characteristic p should contain a field Cp,n , it is, by the foregoing,
                                               n
necessary and sufficient that the function xp − x decompose in K into linear factors. The pn
           n
zeros of xp − x then form the field. From this it follows first that:
      2. A field can contain no more than one subfield of type Cp,n for a given n.
      If d is a divisor of n, then pd − 1 is a divisor of pn − 1; hence
                                            d            d       
                                        xp − x = x xp −1 − ε

is a divisor of                                             
                                          n          n
                                        xp − x = x xp −1 − ε .
  1
   This was probably first stated and proved by Moore (Math. Papers read at the intern. math. congress,
Chicago 1893, (New York 1896), p. 210 ff.).




                                                    45
Ernst Steinitz                                                                          Algebraic Theory of Fields


                                                                         n
Thus if the field K contains a field Cp,n , the function xp − x decomposes in K, and therefore so
                         d
too does the function xp − x, into linear factors. Hence the following theorem holds:
   3. If a field K contains a field Cp,n , then it also contains fields of all types Cp,d , where d
denotes a divisor of n.
    A further consequence of 2. and 3. is:
    4. A field Cp,n has as many subfields as the number n has divisors; each divisor of n denotes
the degree of a subfield; moreover:
    5. If the field K contains a field Cp,n , then this field consists of all absolutely algebraic elements
of K whose degree is a divisor of n.
    For first, every element of Cp,n is absolutely algebraic and its degree is a divisor of n.
Conversely, if a is an absolutely algebraic element of K and its degree d is a divisor of n, then
the field Pp (a) contained in K is of type Cp,d and, since K contains only one field of this type, it
is identical with the one which is also contained in Cp,n . Thus a is an element of Cp,n .
    Let K be an arbitrary field of characteristic p; let a and b be absolutely algebraic elements of
K, let m and n be their degrees, let m be relatively prime to n, and let t be the degree of a + b.
Then (§ 12, 4.)
                                            tn       tn     tn    tn
                           a + b = (a + b)p = ap + bp = ap + b,
so that
                                                                 tn
                                                      a = ap .
It follows that m divides tn, and hence also divides t. Similarly one shows that n divides t,
whence t is divisible by m · n. On the other hand,
                                                mn          mn          mn
                                     (a + b)p        = ap        + bp        = a + b,

so that mn is divisible by t, and hence t = mn. This result extends at once to sums of more
than two elements, and gives:
    6. If a1 , a2 , . . . , aν are absolutely algebraic elements of a field of prime characteristic, and if
their degrees are pairwise relatively prime, then the degree of a1 + a2 + · · · + aν is equal to the
product of these degrees.
    From this we draw a few simple consequences. Suppose

                                                n = q1r1 · q2r2 · · · qνrν                                       (1.)

is the decomposition of the natural number n into powers of distinct primes. Then a field of type
Cp,n contains a subfield A of absolute degree qiri (i = 1, . . . , ν), and this contains a subfield B of
degree qiri −1 . If ai is an element contained in A but not in B, then the degree of ai is a divisor
of qiri but, by 5., not a divisor of qiri −1 , and hence is equal to qiri . We can therefore take from the
field Cp,n ν elements a1 , a2 , . . . , aν of degrees q1r1 , q2r2 , . . . , qνrν . The element a1 + a2 + · · · + aν is
then of degree n, hence primitive, and so we have proved:
    7. Every finite field is simple with respect to its prime field, and therefore over that prime
field there are irreducible functions of every degree n.
    Suppose that the field K of characteristic p contains the fields Cp,n1 and Cp,n2 ; let n be the
least common multiple of n1 and n2 , and let equation (1.) give the decomposition of n into prime
powers. Then qiri (i = 1, . . . , ν) divides at least one of the numbers n1 , n2 ; hence K contains a
finite field of degree qiri , and therefore also an element ai of this degree. If for i = 1, . . . , ν we
choose one such element each, then a = a1 + a2 + · · · + aν is an element and Pp (a) is a field of
absolute degree n. Thus:
   8. If the field K contains finite fields of (absolute) degrees n1 and n2 , and if n is the least
common multiple of n1 and n2 , then K also contains a field of degree n.

                                                            46
Ernst Steinitz                                                          Algebraic Theory of Fields


    By theorem 7. we can fill the gap which remained in the proof of § 11, 4., where the case
of a finite field had been excluded. Namely, if we extend a finite field K, by adjoining finitely
many algebraic elements α, β, γ, . . ., to a field Ω, then Ω is finite with respect to K, and hence
also with respect to the prime field; therefore Ω is a finite field. By 7. there are elements ξ in Ω
such that Pp (ξ) = Ω, and consequently also K(ξ) = Ω. Thus Ω is simple with respect to K; and
since K is a perfect field, ξ is a zero of an irreducible function over K with simple zeros. Hence:
   9. The theorem § 11, 4. also holds for finite fields.
    Every element of the field Cp,n satisfies, in the prime field Pp = Cp,1 , an irreducible equation
                                                                          n
g(x) = 0 whose degree is a divisor of n. Therefore, if the function xp − x, whose zeros are all
elements of Cp,n , is decomposed in Pp into irreducible factors, these factors are all distinct and
their degrees are divisors of n. Conversely, however, every irreducible function g(x) over Pp
                                                                 n
whose degree d divides n must occur among the factors of xp − x. For let Ω be an extension of
Pp just sufficient for the decomposition of g(x), and let a be a zero of g(x) in Ω. Then Pp (a) is a
field Cp,d and, by 5., contains all elements of Ω whose degree is a divisor of d, hence in particular
                                                                    d
all zeros of g(x). It follows that Pp (a) = Ω, and the function xp − x, which has all elements of
                                                                                           n
Pp (a) = Cp,d = Ω as zeros, must be divisible by g(x). Therefore g(x) also divides xp − x, and
we obtain the theorem:
                         n
   10. The function xp − x is the product of all irreducible functions of the prime field Pp
whose degree is a divisor of n.




                                                 47
Ernst Steinitz                                                            English translation, §§ 1–16


§ 16.
The absolutely algebraic fields of prime characteristic.
Let p be an arbitrary prime number, but one fixed once and for all for the following considerations.
We now wish to consider the absolutely algebraic fields of characteristic p. Among these are all
finite fields of characteristic p, which are characterized by being finite with respect to the prime
field P. In the more comprehensive domain of all absolutely algebraic fields of characteristic p
one now finds, in the main, the same laws as in the narrower domain of finite fields. In order to
make this stand out more clearly, denote all prime numbers in their natural order by q1 , q2 , q3 , . . .,
so that
                                     q1 = 2, q2 = 3, q3 = 5, . . .
Then every natural number is represented in one way in the form
                                                 ∞
                                                 Y
                                                   qixi ,                                            (1.)
                                                 i=1

where the exponents xi are non-negative integers, only finitely many of which differ from 0. We
shall now more generally consider all symbolic expressions of the form (1.), in which for each
exponent xi one may put, at will, 0 or a natural number or also the sign ∞; for these expressions,
which we call G-numbers (G = degree), and which include the natural numbers, we stipulate, in
agreement with the laws valid for natural numbers, the following. Two G-numbers
                                        Y x            Y λ
                                  m=       qi i ,  n=      qi i

are called equal if and only if, for every i, xi = λi . The number m is called divisible by n, a
multiple of n, and so on, if for every i one has λi ≤ xi . Here ∞ counts as greater than every
other exponent. If m is divisible by n, we also form the quotient by stipulating that
                                          m Y xi −λi
                                             =     qi
                                          n
where xi − λi is to be set equal to 0 when xi = ∞, λi = ∞, and equal to ∞ when xi = ∞
but λi is finite. It then follows at once: all G-numbers are divisible by 1, and all divide the
G-number whose exponents xi are all equal to ∞. Given any system of finitely or infinitely many
G-numbers, these always possess a greatest common divisor t, into which all common divisors
divide, and a least common multiple v, which divides all common multiples. The exponent of qi
in t is equal to the smallest exponent which qi has in the given G-numbers; the exponent of qi in
v is equal to the largest of these exponents, or, if no such largest exponent exists — namely, if
no exponent of qi is equal to ∞, but every finite number is exceeded by some of these exponents
—, equal to ∞.
    If m is any G-number, then the natural numbers which divide m form a system S with the
following properties:
    1) If n is a number in S, then every divisor of n also belongs to S.
    2) If n1 , n2 are numbers in S, then their least common multiple is also a number in S.
   The number m is then in every case the least common multiple of all the numbers in S, and
hence is itself completely determined by the system S. Conversely, if one has any system S of
natural numbers which has the properties 1) and 2), and if m is the least common multiple of all
numbers in S, then S consists of all natural numbers which divide m.
    Now let K be any absolutely algebraic field of characteristic p. The degrees of the finite
fields contained in K then form a system S of natural numbers which, by § 15, 3. and 8., has
the properties 1) and 2). Let m be the least common multiple of the numbers in S. If m is a

                                                   52
Ernst Steinitz                                                             English translation, §§ 1–16


natural number, then K is a finite field of degree m. Conversely, if K is a finite field, then m
represents the degree of this field. We shall now also, however, in the cases where K is not finite
and accordingly m is not a natural number, call m the absolute degree of K. Thus:
   1. Every absolutely algebraic field of characteristic p has a definite degree, which is a G-number.
   Moreover, the following theorems hold, as we still have to show:
   2. There is an absolutely algebraic field of characteristic p whose degree is equal to any
prescribed G-number.
   3. All absolutely algebraic fields of the same characteristic p and the same degree are
isomorphic.
   To arrive at a proof of 2., we assign a numbering to the integral functions reduced modulo p.
By the number ν of such a function

                                f (x) = an xn + an−1 xn−1 + · · · + a0 ,                            (2.)

in which the coefficients are therefore numbers from the series 0, 1, . . . , p − 1, we mean the number
f (p), so that
                                  ν = an pn + an−1 pn−1 + · · · + a0 .                              (3.)
Then not only does every function considered here have a number ≥ 0, but every integer ≥ 0
also represents the number of one and only one of these functions. For equation (3.) is nothing
other than the representation of the number ν in the system with base p. We then transfer this
numbering to the integral functions of a prime field P = Pp , that is, to all elements of P[x],
which are also represented uniquely in the form (2.). As is seen at once, of two functions of
different degree the one of smaller degree also has the smaller number; and among functions
of the same degree, those in which the coefficient of the highest power is the unit have smaller
numbers than the others.
    If n is any natural number, then, as we know, there are irreducible functions of degree n in P.
Among these let the one with the smallest number be denoted by φn (x). If d is a divisor of n,
then in a finite extension field Cp,n there are elements j, j1 , . . . , jn−1 which satisfy the equation
φn (x) = 0, and d elements which satisfy the equation φd (x) = 0. The latter can be represented
as integral functions of j, of degree < n, with coefficients belonging to P. In the language of
congruences this can be expressed as follows: there are in P d functions χ1 (x), . . . , χd (x), of
degree < n, for which

                          φd (χi (x)) ≡ 0   (mod φn (x))      (i = 1, . . . , d).

Among these we denote the one with the smallest number by ψd,n (x). We can then say: if in
an extension field of P the element j is a zero of φn (x), then ψd,n (j) is a zero of φd (x). The
functions φn (x) and ψd,n (x) are well-defined functions from P for every natural number n and
every divisor d of n, and they are easily computed for each given n, d. Let it also be noted that
φ1 (x) = x, ψ1,n (x) = 0, while ψd,n (x), as soon as d > 1, is at least of first degree. For n > 1,
ψn,n (x) is equal to x.
   Now let any G-number                            Y x
                                             m=     qi i
be given. For each natural number n, denote by rn the greatest common divisor of n! and m;
then
                                        r1 , r2 , . . .                                (4.)
form a sequence of natural numbers, each of which divides the following ones. A natural number
n which divides m divides rn as well, because it divides n!. But a number which does not divide
m cannot divide any of the numbers (4.). Hence the system S of natural divisors of m is identical

                                                  53
Ernst Steinitz                                                                     English translation, §§ 1–16


with the system of numbers which divide numbers of the sequence (4.). Apart from the already
settled case in which m is finite, that is, a natural number, the numbers (4.) will grow beyond
all bounds. By omitting elements from (4.) we can arrange that an infinite sequence of numbers
remains in which the very first element is already > 1 and no two are equal. This sequence
of numbers still has the properties on which alone we rely: namely, every number divides the
following ones, and the natural numbers which divide numbers of the sequence are precisely the
divisors of m.
    We now introduce a system of elements
                                                j1 , j2 , . . . in inf.
by stipulating that jn is to be a zero of the function φrn (x) — for which we shall also write
φn (x). Then P(jn ) = Kn is a finite field of degree rn . Thus we obtain a system of fields
                                           K0 = P,          K1 ,      K2 , . . .                              (5.)
which at first have nothing to do with one another. If we replace the function symbol ψrn ,rn+1
by ψ n,n+1 , then ψ n,n+1 (jn+1 ) is a zero of φn (x), and therefore there is a uniquely determined
isomorphic relation between Kn = P(jn ) and the field P(ψ n,n+1 (jn+1 )) contained in Kn+1 =
P(jn+1 ), under which the element jn corresponds to the element ψ n,n+1 (jn+1 ). We may therefore,
without thereby invalidating the relations so far existing between the elements, stipulate that
jn = ψ n,n+1 (jn+1 ). By this stipulation, which is to hold for every n, each field of the series (5.)
becomes part of the following one. The totality of all elements occurring in these fields forms a
field Ω, and it is easy to show that this field has the desired properties. First it is clear that Ω
is an absolutely algebraic field of characteristic p, since this holds for all the fields in (5.). If,
moreover, n is a natural number which divides m, then n divides rν , and the field Kν , whose
degree is rν , has a subfield of degree n, which is also a subfield of Ω. But if n does not divide
m, and hence does not divide any number rν , then none of the fields Kν contains an element of
degree n; thus Ω contains no such element either, and hence no field of degree n. Therefore m is
the degree of Ω.
    We now come to the proof of 3. and suppose that, besides the field Ω just constructed, a
second field Ω′ is given which, like Ω, is absolutely algebraic, has characteristic p, and has degree
m. We must show that Ω and Ω′ are isomorphic. In this proof we may, as is easily seen, suppose
that the prime field of Ω′ is identical with that of Ω. Since each of the numbers rn divides the
degree m of Ω′ , by hypothesis Ω′ has a finite subfield K′n of degree rn , and therefore the function
φn (x) irreducible in P, whose degree is rn , must decompose into linear factors in Ω′ . Let us now
imagine that from Ω′ some system of elements
                                                i1 , i2 , . . . in inf.
has been selected in such a way that in becomes a zero of φn (x).1 From this system we shall
now derive, in a uniquely determined way, a second such system
                                                j1′′ , j2′′ , . . . in inf.
For this purpose we stipulate that j1′′ = i1 , and give a method by which jn+1′′   is determined once
the elements j1 , . . . , jn have already been determined. Now in+1 is a zero of the function φn+1 (x)
              ′′           ′′
                                            f
irreducible in P; hence every power ipn+1 is also a zero of φn+1 (x), and each zero is obtained once
when the exponent f is given the values 0, 1, . . . , (rn+1 − 1). Furthermore, from φn+1 (in+1 ) = 0
it follows that ψ n,n+1 (in+1 ) is a zero of φn (x). By
                                                                p f
                                                 ψ n,n+1 (in+1 )                                              (6.)
   1
     At this point the principle of choice is used here for the first time. It cannot in any way be avoided in the
proof of the present theorem.


                                                           54
Ernst Steinitz                                                                     English translation, §§ 1–16


each zero of φn (x), and therefore also jn′′ , is represented once when f is set equal to 0, 1, . . . , (rn −1).
Let ν be that one
                ν
                   of these numbers for which the expression (6.) is equal to jn′′ . We then stipulate
              p
that jn+1
      ′′   = in+1 . Since ψ n,n+1 (x) is a function in the prime field, we have
                                             p ν               ν
                       jn′′ = ψ n,n+1 (in+1 )     = ψ n,n+1 (ipn+1 ) = ψ n,n+1 (jn+1
                                                                                 ′′
                                                                                     ),

and hence for every n we have the equations

                                   φn (jn′′ ) = 0,    jn′′ = ψ n,n+1 (jn+1
                                                                       ′′
                                                                           ).                              (7.)

Of the fields in the series
                                   P,    K′1 = P(j1′′ ),   K′2 = P(j2′′ ), . . .                           (8.)
each is contained in the next, and all are subfields of Ω′ . But every element of Ω′ also occurs
in fields of this series. For the degree of an element of Ω′ is a divisor of m, hence a divisor of
some number rn , and the field K′n , whose degree is rn , contains (§ 15, 5.) all elements of Ω′
whose degree divides rn . Now the element jn of Kn and the element jn′′ of K′n are zeros of the
same irreducible function φn (x) from P; therefore there exists a definite isomorphic relation πn
between Kn = P(jn ) and K′n = P(jn′′ ) in which the elements jn and jn′′ correspond to one another.
From
                             jn = ψ n,n+1 (jn+1 ),  jn′′ = ψ n,n+1 (jn+1
                                                                     ′′
                                                                         )
it follows further that the relation πn+1 includes the relation πn . It follows at once that the
isomorphisms
                                           π1 , π2 , . . .
produce a one-to-one, and indeed isomorphic, relation between Ω and Ω′ . Theorem 3 is thereby
proved.
    We shall now, even when m is an infinite G-number, denote by Cp,m an absolutely algebraic
field of characteristic p and degree m. The degree m was defined as the least common multiple of
the degrees of the finite fields contained in Cp,m , or, equivalently, of the degrees of the elements
of Cp,m ; and the system of these degrees is identical with the system of natural numbers which
divide m. On this basis one easily proves:
    4. If one adjoins to the prime field Pp a system S of algebraic elements, then there arises
an absolutely algebraic field Cp,m whose degree m is equal to the least common multiple of the
degrees of the elements of S.
    Let m′ be this least common multiple. Then m, as least common multiple of the degrees of all
elements of Cp,m , is divisible by m′ . Suppose first that S is a finite system; then Cp,m = Pp (S)
is a finite field and contains a field Cp,m′ . To this latter field, however, belong all elements of Cp,m
whose degree divides m′ . Since all elements of S belong to it, it follows that Cp,m′ = Cp,m , and
hence m′ = m. If the system S is infinite and α is an element of Cp,m , of degree n, then one can
determine a finite subsystem S′ of S such that α is contained in the finite field Pp (S′ ). Then n
divides the degree of Pp (S′ ), and by what precedes this degree is equal to the least common
multiple of the degrees of the elements of S′ , hence is a divisor of m′ . Thus n divides m′ , and
m′ is therefore the least common multiple not only of the degrees of the elements of S, but of all
elements of Cp,m . Again, then, m′ = m.
    If a field Ω contains a field Cp,m , and the natural number n divides m, then Cp,m contains a
finite field Cp,n , and this contains all elements of degree n occurring in Ω (§ 15, 5.). On the other
hand, the degree of every element of Cp,m must divide m. Thus Cp,m consists of all absolutely
algebraic elements of Ω whose degree divides m. This is the extension of the theorem § 15, 5. to
all absolutely algebraic fields of prime characteristic. It follows at once from it that the theorems
2., 3., 4., and 8. of § 15 also hold generally in the domain of absolutely algebraic fields of prime
characteristic.

                                                      55
Ernst Steinitz                                                                   English translation, §§ 1–16


    Let m and m′ be two G-numbers, with m divisible by m′ . Then a field Cp,m contains a field
Cp,m′ . Now let α be an element of Cp,m , and let n be its absolute degree. By 4., the absolute
degree of the field Cp,m′ (α) is then equal to the least common multiple ν of m′ and n. If m′ is
finite, then ν = [Cp,m′ (α) : P] = [α : Cp,m′ ] m′ , whence
                                                               ν
                                              [α : Cp,m′ ] =      ,
                                                               m′
or finally
                                                               n
                                           [α : Cp,m′ ] =            ,                                     (9.)
                                                            (n, m′ )
where again (n, m′ ) denotes the greatest common divisor of n and m′ . The same equation also
holds when m′ is not a natural number. For if, in this case, ν denotes any natural number
dividing m′ , then Cp,m′ contains a subfield Cp,ν , and by (9.) one has
                                                                        n
                                     [α : Cp,m′ ] ≤ [α : Cp,ν ] =            .
                                                                      (n, ν)

Conversely, ν can be chosen so that [α : Cp,m′ ] = (n,ν)   n
                                                              . For the irreducible function f (x) from
Cp,m′ which has α as a zero belongs to a finite field, namely to the one obtained from P by
adjoining the coefficients of f (x). If ν is the degree of this field, then [α : Cp,m′ ] = [α : Cp,ν ] = (n,ν)
                                                                                                           n
                                                                                                               .
Hence [α : Cp,m ] is equal to the minimum of the expression (n,ν) , and this occurs when (n, ν)
                 ′
                                                                         n

reaches its maximum. Since ν is to be a divisor of m′ , this maximum cannot be > (n, m′ ), but
this value is also reached, namely for ν = (n, m′ ). Hence equation (9.) holds in general.
    We now consider the fields Cp,k between Cp,m′ and Cp,m . Every G-number k which is a
multiple of m′ and a divisor of m represents the degree of such a field. If this field is finite with
respect to Cp,m′ , then it is also simple (§ 11, 5.; § 12, 5.). If then α is a primitive element of Cp,k
with respect to Cp,m′ , and n is its absolute degree, then by the preceding
                                                                 n
                                          [Cp,k : Cp,m′ ] =            .
                                                              (n, m′ )

If all fields Cp,k finite with respect to Cp,m′ are considered, then n may be any natural number
dividing m. The totality of all numbers of the form (n,m    n
                                                              ′ ) is, however, as follows at once from
the definition given above of the quotient of two G-numbers, identical with the totality of all
natural numbers dividing m     m
                                ′ , and therefore has m′ as least common multiple. Thus if Cp,m is
                                                      m

finite with respect to Cp,m′ , then m′ is a natural number, and conversely; and in this case
                                       m


                                                                 m
                                            [Cp,m : Cp,m′ ] =       .
                                                                 m′
It is therefore advisable to take this equation as the definition of the relative degree in the cases
in which m m
             ′ is not finite. Now, if k is made to run through all multiples of m which divide m,
                                                                                   ′

then mk′ gives all divisors of mm
                                 ′ , each exactly once. Thus:

    5. If Cp,m′ is a subfield of Cp,m , then the degrees, taken with respect to Cp,m′ , of the fields
                                           m                     m
between Cp,m′ and Cp,m are divisors of m    ′ ; every divisor of m′ gives the relative degree of one

and only one such field.
    Let                                               Y x
                                                m=     qi i ,
let φ(x) be an irreducible function in a field Cp,m , and let n be its degree. By adjoining a zero of
                                                   µ
φ(x), Cp,m is extended to a field Cp,µ , and n = m   . It follows that n can contain no prime factor
qi whose exponent xi in the decomposition of m is equal to ∞. Conversely, if n is a natural
                                                                               µ
number which contains no such prime factor, then µ can be chosen so that m       = n. A field Cp,µ is


                                                      56
Ernst Steinitz                                                                         English translation, §§ 1–16


then simple with respect to its subfield Cp,m , and every primitive element is a zero of a function
irreducible in Cp,m of degree n. Hence:
   6. In a field Cp,m there are irreducible functions of all and only the finite degrees n which
contain only such prime factors qi whose exponent xi in
                                               Y x
                                           m=      qi i

is finite.
    One further remark may be made here. The preceding investigations, as well as those which
follow, can also be presented in the Kroneckerian form of expressions by means of systems of
moduli; but one must then enlarge this concept by also bringing integral functions of infinitely
many indeterminates into consideration. As such indeterminates we must then interpret the
elements j1 , j2 , . . . introduced above, while φn (x) and ψd,n (x) are to be regarded as integral
functions reduced modulo p of a further indeterminate x. Let m again be an arbitrary G-number,
let r1 , r2 , . . . be an associated sequence of natural numbers of the kind described earlier, and
write φn , ψ n,n+1 for φrn , ψrn ,rn+1 . Further let S denote the system of all integral functions of
the indeterminates j (this is of course to be understood so that each individual element of S is
always to contain only a finite number of these indeterminates), and let T be the subsystem of S
consisting of the functions

                    p;   φ1 (j1 ),   φ2 (j2 ), . . . ;   ψ 1,2 (j2 ) − j1 ,   ψ 2,3 (j3 ) − j2 , . . .

The system T defines a system of moduli M . Two elements of S are called congruent modulo M
if their difference can be represented in the form

                                       A1 B1 + A2 B2 + · · · + Aν Bν ,

where A1 , A2 , . . . , Aν are elements of S and B1 , B2 , . . . , Bν are elements of T . Now every integral
function of x, reduced modulo p, whose degree divides m, decomposes modulo M in a definite
way into linear factors whose coefficients are elements of S, and the residue classes of the system
of moduli M within S form a field of type Cp,m . If one takes
                                                     Y
                                               m=        qi∞ ,

then every integral function of x whose coefficients belong to S decomposes modulo M into linear
factors (see § 17).




                                                          57
Ernst Steinitz                                                                    English translation, §§ 1–19


§ 17.
Algebraically closed fields.
In § 8 we treated the problem: in a field K a polynomial f (x) is given; sought is an extension
field Ω in which f (x) decomposes completely. But we can now also pose the substantially more
far-reaching problem of finding, for the field K, an extension Ω in which every function from K
decomposes. The preceding paragraph contains the solution of this problem for the case of the
prime field Pp . Namely, if we put
                                        Y
                                  m=        qi∞ ,   Cp,m = Ap ,
then m is divisible by every natural number n, and therefore in Ap every irreducible, and hence
also every reducible, function from Pp must decompose completely.1 From § 16, 6. it is further
seen that in Ap only irreducible functions of degree 1 exist. Thus Ap belongs to that special kind
of fields which we designated in § 7 as closed. These are of course of the greatest importance for
the question touched on here, and we therefore collect here some simple propositions concerning
them.
    1. If Ω is an algebraic extension of a field K, and every polynomial from K decomposes in Ω
into linear factors, then Ω is algebraically closed.
    Indeed, let φ(x) be an irreducible function from Ω, and let j be a zero which φ(x) has in Ω or
in an extension field of Ω. Then Ω(j) is algebraic with respect to Ω, and hence also with respect
to K, and j is a zero of a polynomial f (x) from K. Since this polynomial decomposes in Ω into
linear factors, while in Ω(j) it has the linear factor x − j, the element j belongs to Ω. Thus φ(x)
has degree 1, and Proposition 1 is proved.
    Let Ω be an algebraically closed field, let K be a subfield of Ω, and let A be the field between
K and Ω which comprises the elements algebraic with respect to K. An arbitrary function φ(x)
from A then decomposes in Ω into linear factors; its zeros are algebraic with respect to A, and
therefore also with respect to K, and hence are elements of A. Thus φ(x) already decomposes
completely in A, so that the field A is algebraically closed. — If T is a field between K and Ω, if
α is an element of A, and if ψ(x) is the irreducible function from K with zero α, then ψ(x) also
belongs to the field T; and if T is algebraically closed, then ψ(x) decomposes in T into linear
factors, so that α is an element of T, and hence A is a subfield of T. Thus A proves to be the
smallest algebraically closed field between K and Ω; it is contained in every other such field. If Ω
itself is to be as small as possible among algebraically closed extensions of K, then one must have
Ω = A. Therefore:
   2. In every extension Ω of a field K which represents an algebraically closed field, there is a
smallest extension of this kind; it is distinguished from all the others by being algebraic.
    In the preceding considerations take, for K, the prime field P contained in Ω. Then A
becomes an absolutely algebraic field and consists of all absolutely algebraic elements of Ω. If
the characteristic of Ω is a prime number p, then A also has this characteristic and is therefore a
field Cp,m . Since every irreducible function from Pp decomposes in Cp,m , the number m must be
divisible by every natural number, whence
                                          Y
                                     m=      qi∞ ,   Cp,m = Ap .
Thus:
    3. In every algebraically closed field Ω of characteristic p there is contained a field of type Ap ;
it consists of all absolutely algebraic elements of Ω.
   1
     L. E. Dickson speaks of such a field (Transactions of the American Math. Soc. 8 (1907), p. 389). He explains
it incorrectly, however, as the totality of all Galois fields belonging to the prime number p (Galois field = finite
field, or the type of such a field); no proof of existence is given.


                                                        54
Ernst Steinitz                                                        English translation, §§ 1–19


    The analogous statement holds for fields of characteristic 0. Appealing first to known facts,
we note that the field of all algebraic numbers is algebraically closed and that it is an algebraic
extension of the field of rational numbers. For the latter type we use, as before, the symbol P0 ;
for the former we introduce the symbol A0 . One ordinarily arrives at the field of all algebraic
numbers by regarding them as special complex numbers. But even without calling upon the
general complex numbers, one can pass, just as from Pp to Ap , from P0 to an absolutely algebraic
and algebraically closed field by defining an infinite sequence of fields

                                    K0 = P0 ,   K1 ,   K2 , . . . ,

each of which contains the preceding ones and is still finite with respect to P0 , and whose
elements, taken together, represent an algebraically closed field. Here too, by using the principle
of choice, one succeeds in proving that A0 is the unique type of the required kind. Hence
Proposition 3 also holds for characteristic 0.
    We shall not enter further into these special investigations. Rather, we shall prove quite
generally that every field K can be extended to an algebraically closed field, and that the problem
of finding such an extension has, in essence, only one solution if one further requires that the
extension be as small as possible, or — what by 2. amounts to the same thing — that it be
algebraic.


§ 18.
Relations between systems of polynomials and extension fields.
In the investigations of this paragraph we take as fixed an arbitrarily chosen field K. We consider
systems of polynomials in one indeterminate x with coefficients from K. Such functions are
always meant when function systems are mentioned without qualification; likewise expressions
such as “extension field”, “normal function”, and so forth always refer to the ground field K.
    Let Ω be an extension field, and let S be a system of finitely or infinitely many functions
which decompose completely in Ω. Then Ω contains a definite extension Ω′ which just suffices
for the complete decomposition of the functions from S. Namely, one has Ω′ = K(T), where T
denotes the system of zeros which the functions of the system S possess inside Ω.
    If S denotes any finite system of functions, then there always exist (see the end of § 8)
extension fields in which the functions from S decompose completely. We now set up the
definition:
    Definition 1. A function φ(x) is called subordinate to the finite function system S if it
likewise decomposes completely in every extension field in which the functions from S decompose
completely.
   It follows immediately:
   1. The function φ(x) is subordinate to the finite system S as soon as it also decomposes in
some extension field Ω1 which just suffices for the complete decomposition of the system S.
   For if Ω2 is any second extension inside which S decomposes completely, then Ω2 contains an
extension Ω′2 which just suffices for the complete decomposition of S. By § 8, 2., the extensions
Ω1 and Ω′2 are equivalent; and since φ(x) decomposes completely in Ω1 , it also decomposes
completely in Ω′2 and hence in Ω2 .
    There would now be nothing to prevent Definition 1 from being used also in the case where
the system S consists of infinitely many functions, if it had already been proved that extension
fields in which the functions of S decompose completely exist in this case too. Since this has
not yet been done, we must rely on another definition. We arrive at one by starting from the


                                                55
Ernst Steinitz                                                         English translation, §§ 1–19


observation that, in the case of a finite system S, a function φ(x) which is subordinate to a
subsystem of S is also subordinate to S itself.
   Definition 2. A function φ(x) is called subordinate to the infinite system S if it is subordinate
to some finite subsystem of S. — If S1 , S2 are any two function systems, we say that S1 is
subordinate to S2 if every function from S1 is subordinate to the system S2 .
   Then the following proposition holds:
    2. If the system S1 is subordinate to the system S2 , and the latter is subordinate to the system
S3 , then S1 is subordinate to the system S3 .
    Indeed, an arbitrary function φ(x) from S1 is subordinate to a finite subsystem S2′ of S2 , and
this is subordinate to a finite subsystem S3′ of S3 (Definition 2). Since S3′ is finite, there exist
extensions inside which all functions of S3′ decompose completely. In every such extension the
functions of S2′ decompose, and therefore φ(x) also decomposes completely (Definition 1). Thus
φ(x) is subordinate to the system S3′ , and hence also to the system S3 , proving 2.
   Definition 3. Two function systems are called equivalent if each is subordinate to the other.
   The preceding definitions and propositions show at once that every function system is
equivalent to itself; that two function systems equivalent to a third are equivalent to one another;
and that every finite system of functions is equivalent to the product of these functions.
   Definition 4. A function system S will be called complete if every function subordinate to
S belongs to S.
    If S is any system, then a system S ′ , if it is to be complete and equivalent to S, must contain
only such functions as are subordinate to S, but it must contain all of them. Conversely, one sees
at once that the system of all functions subordinate to S is in fact equivalent to S and complete.
Thus every system S is equivalent to exactly one complete system. The smallest complete system
is evidently formed by the functions which decompose completely in K itself, and the largest
by the totality of all functions from K. It is also evident that the intersection of two complete
systems, or of any system, finite or infinite, of complete systems, is again a complete system.
    To these propositions are appended some others which express relations between function
systems and the associated decomposition fields. First, the preceding definitions and propositions
immediately give:
    3. If Ω is an extension of K, and S is a function system which decomposes completely in
Ω, then every system S ′ subordinate to S also decomposes completely in Ω; and if S and S ′ are
equivalent and the extension Ω just suffices for the complete decomposition of S, then it also just
suffices for the complete decomposition of S ′ .
   This proposition shows that in questions concerning the existence and the properties of
extensions in which a given function system decomposes, that system may be replaced by any
equivalent one.
   We prove further:
   4. If the extension N just suffices to decompose the function system S completely, then it is
normal, and every function which decomposes completely in N is subordinate to the system S.
    Proof. Let T be the system of those elements of N which are zeros of functions from S.
Then our assumption implies that N = K(T). Now let φ(x) denote any irreducible function
from K which has a zero α in N. Then one can specify a finite subsystem T′ of T such that α
already belongs to the field K(T′ ); and, because T′ is finite, a finite subsystem S ′ of S can be
specified such that the elements of T′ are zeros of functions from S ′ . If T′′ denotes the system
of all zeros of the functions from S ′ , then the extension field N′ = K(T′′ ) also contains the
element α and just suffices to decompose completely the functions from S ′ . Since S ′ is finite,
N′ is therefore normal with respect to K by § 8, 6.; and consequently the function φ(x) must


                                                 56
Ernst Steinitz                                                                             English translation, §§ 1–19


decompose completely in N′ and hence in N. This shows that the algebraic extension N = K(T)
is likewise normal. Next, from the fact that φ(x) also decomposes in the field N′ , which just
suffices for the complete decomposition of the finite system S ′ , it follows that φ(x) is subordinate
to the system S ′ (Proposition 1). Hence φ(x) is also subordinate to S. Finally, if f (x) is any
function which decomposes completely in N, then by what precedes every irreducible factor of
f (x) is subordinate to the system S; hence the same is true of f (x) itself. Proposition 4 is proved.
— It also follows from it that, once the existence of an extension field in which S decomposes
completely is established for a system S, Definitions 1 and 2 amount to the same thing for this
system S.
    5. The totality S of all functions which decompose completely in an extension field N forms a
complete system, and if the extension is normal, then it just suffices for the complete decomposition
of S.
    Indeed, a function φ(x) which is subordinate to S must decompose completely in N, and
therefore belongs to S; that is, the system S is complete. Further, if T denotes the system of
elements of N which are zeros of functions from S, then the extension K(T) contained in N just
suffices for the decomposition of S. If now N is normal, hence also algebraic, then every element
α of N is a zero of a function φ(x) irreducible in K which decomposes completely in N, and
therefore belongs to S. Hence α is an element of T, and so of K(T); thus N = K(T), proving 5.
    We conclude these investigations with the proof of the theorem:
    6. Every function system S is equivalent to a system of normal functions.
   Proof. (Compare § 13, 3.) Suppose first that S consists of a single irreducible function φ(x),
and let N denote an extension which just suffices for the complete decomposition of φ(x). Then
N is a normal field. If N has a primitive element α, then the function ψ(x) irreducible in K
which has α as a zero is normal and equivalent to φ(x). If N has no primitive element, then K
must be an imperfect field and φ(x) must have an exponent f > 0 (§ 13, 7.). Let
                                                f                       f
                                  φ(x) = xnp + a1 x(n−1)p + · · · + an .

Then, in the field N in which it decomposes, the function φ(x) is the pf -th power of another
function
                    χ(x) = (x − γ1 ) · · · (x − γn ) = xn + b1 xn−1 + · · · + bn ,
                            f
and from φ(x) = (χ(x))p it follows that
                                                    f
                                        ak = bpk               (k = 1, . . . , n).

The function φ(x) has the zeros γ1 , γ2 , . . . , γn , while the function

                                     φ(x) = xn + a1 xn−1 + · · · + an ,
                                                                                     f    f            f
which is an irreducible function of the first kind, has the zeros γ1p , γ2p , . . . , γnp . These are distinct
                                                                                                           f
from one another, and therefore the same is true of γ1 , γ2 , . . . , γn . From ak = bpk it follows that
   f                f
xp − ak = (x − bk )p . Therefore the irreducible function from K with zero bk has the form
                                          t
                                (x − bk )p k            (0 ≤ tk ≤ f ; k = 1, . . . , n)
                                                           f        f        f
and is a normal function. The field N′ = K(γ1p , γ2p , . . . , γnp ), which just suffices for the complete
decomposition of φ(x), is normal, is contained in N, and is a finite extension of the first kind of
K. Hence there are primitive elements in N′ . Let α be one such element, and let ψ(x) be the
irreducible function from K with zero α. Then ψ(x) is a normal function equivalent to φ(x). The
system T of normal functions
                                               t1                       t2                        tn
                         ψ(x),     (x − b1 )p ,           (x − b2 )p , . . . ,       (x − bn )p

                                                               57
Ernst Steinitz                                                              English translation, §§ 1–19


passes to an equivalent system T ′ if ψ(x) is replaced by φ(x). All these functions decompose
completely in N, and hence are subordinate to the function φ(x). A field M between K and
N which suffices for the complete decomposition of the system T ′ must contain the elements
                                                                                      f
b1 , b2 , . . . , bn , and hence the function χ(x); it must also contain the zeros γkp of φ(x) and therefore
                         f
the functions xp − γkp = (x − γk )p . Hence it also contains the functions
                  f                     f



                                                         f
                                      (χ(x), (x − γk )p ) = x − γk

and therefore the elements γk as well. Since N = K(γ1 , γ2 , . . . , γn ), it follows that M = N;
from this follows the equivalence of φ(x) and T ′ , and finally the equivalence of φ(x) and the
normal-function system T .
    This proves Proposition 6 for the case where S consists of a single irreducible function. Now
let S be an arbitrary function system; let S ′ be the system of all irreducible factors of the
functions occurring in S, and let S ′′ be the system of all normal functions subordinate to S ′ .
Then first S is equivalent to S ′ , and S ′′ is subordinate to the system S ′ . Since, furthermore,
every function from S ′ is, by what precedes, equivalent to a system of normal functions, and
since this is a subsystem of S ′′ , it follows that S ′ and S ′′ are equivalent; and S is equivalent to
the normal-function system S ′′ .


§ 19.
Auxiliary considerations from set theory.
By Proposition 5 of the preceding paragraph, every normal extension of a field K corresponds to
a class of equivalent function systems for whose decomposition the extension just suffices; and,
as is immediately seen, the same system class corresponds to every equivalent extension. To
prove conversely that to every system class there corresponds one, and, apart from equivalent
extensions, only one, normal extension, it becomes necessary to bring in considerations from set
theory; in particular, the proof cannot be carried out completely without using the principle of
choice. We therefore give here a brief compilation of some concepts and propositions from that
discipline which will be needed in what follows.
    1. Ordered sets. — A set, or a system of elements, is called ordered, according to G. Cantor,
if a stipulation has been made by which, of any two distinct elements a, b, one, say a, counts as
the earlier (smaller), and the other b as the later (larger); in symbols:

                                            a < b or b > a.

The stipulation must, however, be such that from a < b, b < c, it always follows that a < c.
    2. Cut. — If the elements of an ordered set M are divided into two subsets A, B in such a
way that every element of M belongs to one and only one of these subsets, and that all elements
of A are earlier than all elements of B, such a division is called a cut (Dedekind); the subset A is
called the initial segment, and B the remainder (Cantor).
    3. Order types. — By a similar mapping of two ordered sets M and N one understands a
one-to-one relation between their elements in which, whenever one of two elements of M is the
earlier, the corresponding one of the two assigned elements in N is again the earlier. Ordered
sets which admit such a mapping are called similar, or of the same order type (Cantor).
    4. Well-ordered sets. — A set M is called well ordered (Cantor) if a stipulation has been
made according to which, of any two elements a, b, one counts as the earlier and the other as the
later, and if this stipulation is such that both M and every subset of M contain a first element,
that is, one which is earlier than every other element of the set or subset. — Every well-ordered


                                                    58
Ernst Steinitz                                                         English translation, §§ 1–19


set is also ordered; for if a < b and b < c, then it cannot be that a = c, since the cases a < b
and b < a exclude one another; nor can it be that c < a, for otherwise the set consisting of the
elements a, b, c would contain no first element; hence a < c. — The ordered finite sets also belong
to the well-ordered sets; they are characterized by the fact that every subset of them also has a
last element.
   5. Ordinal numbers. — The order types of well-ordered sets are called ordinal numbers;
the ordinal numbers of finite sets are denoted by 1, 2, 3, . . .. — If M and N are well-ordered sets,
then one of the following three mutually exclusive cases always occurs:
   a) M and N are similar; then there is one and only one similar relation between M and N ;
   b) M is similar to a definite initial segment of N ;
   c) N is similar to a definite initial segment of M .
   In the first case M and N have the same ordinal number; in the second, the ordinal number
of M is called smaller, and in the third, larger, than that of N . It is useful also to introduce an
ordinal number 0, which counts as the smallest of all.
   Every system of ordinal numbers, when they are ordered by increasing size, forms a well-
ordered set; in particular, all ordinal numbers, including 0, which are smaller than an ordinal
number σ (σ > 0), form a well-ordered set to which the ordinal number σ itself belongs. Thus if
one has a well-ordered set of ordinal number σ, it is convenient to represent its elements by a
symbol with an index:
                                       a0 , a1 , a2 , . . . , aν , . . . ,
where the index ν runs through all ordinal numbers 0 ≤ ν < σ. Each ordinal number ν (for
0 < ν < σ) then corresponds to a definite initial segment of the well-ordered system, which has
precisely the ordinal number ν. It is formed by all elements preceding aν , and is therefore also
called the initial segment determined by aν . — For simplicity of notation we make the following
conventions: a well-ordered system of elements aν is denoted by

                         {aν } or, more precisely, {aν } (0 ≤ ν < σ),

where σ indicates the ordinal number of the system, or else by a single letter, say A. In the last
case Aν (0 < ν < σ) is always to be understood as the initial segment of A determined by aν ,
while Aσ = A is to be put.
    Among the ordinal numbers distinct from 0, those of the first and second kind are to be
distinguished. An ordinal number α is said to be of the first or of the second kind according
as a well-ordered set of ordinal number α does or does not contain a last element. Since the
system of all ordinal numbers below α itself has ordinal number α, if α is of the first kind, then
there is an ordinal number β which immediately precedes α. We put β = α − 1, α = β + 1. If
α is of the second kind, then there is no immediately preceding ordinal number. These ordinal
numbers are also called limit numbers. The reason for this designation is clear from the following
consideration. Let S be a system of ordinal numbers with the property that there is no greatest
among them, so that each is exceeded by other numbers of the same system (for example, the
system of all finite ordinal numbers, or of all even finite ordinal numbers). Let T further denote
the system of all those ordinal numbers which are exceeded by some ordinal number from S. It
is then evident that S is contained in T ; that T too contains no greatest number; and that if σ
is any ordinal number from T , then every ordinal number < σ also belongs to T . The system
T itself has an ordinal number τ , which is a limit number. If now σ > 0 is any element of T ,
then the ordinal numbers which are < σ form an initial segment of T whose ordinal number is
smaller than the ordinal number of T . That is, σ < τ . Conversely, every ordinal number < τ
must belong to T . For if the system T were only a part of the system T ′ of all ordinal numbers
< τ , then the numbers belonging to T in T ′ would precede those not belonging to T ; that is, T
would be an initial segment of T ′ , and the ordinal number τ of T would be smaller than that of

                                                 59
Ernst Steinitz                                                        English translation, §§ 1–19


T ′ , whereas T ′ , as the system of all ordinal numbers < τ , must have the ordinal number τ . Thus
T consists of all and only the ordinal numbers < τ , and by the definition of T , τ now represents
the smallest ordinal number which is not exceeded by any ordinal number of the system S. Such
a number therefore exists for every system of ordinal numbers which has no maximum, and by
analogy with ordinary usage it would be called the upper bound of S. Every limit number τ is,
among other things, the upper bound of all ordinal numbers < τ .
    6. Complete induction and the well-ordering theorem. — If a certain assertion
concerning ordinal numbers holds for an ordinal number α, does not hold for another β > α,
and T denotes the system of those ordinal numbers between α and β (including α and β) for
which the assertion does not hold, then T , as a well-ordered set, has a first element γ; and γ
is then the smallest ordinal number > α for which the assertion does not hold. Thus in the
domain of ordinal numbers there is the principle of complete induction: if a proposition holds
for the ordinal number α, and one can prove that it must hold for the ordinal number β > α
whenever it is correct for all ordinal numbers which are < β and ≥ α, then the proposition holds
for all ordinal numbers ≥ α. The importance of ordinal numbers for applications rests on the
principle of complete induction. Their extensive applicability, however, is opened up by Zermelo’s
theorem,2 according to which every set is capable of being well ordered. The theorem concerns, of
course, only the existence of the well-ordering; it gives no method for actually carrying it out for
an arbitrarily given set.




  2
      E. Zermelo, Math. Ann. vol. 59 (1904), p. 514.


                                                       60
Ernst Steinitz                                                           English translation, §§ 1–20


§ 20. The Next Applications.
Definition 1. Progressive systems of functions. – Let K0 be an arbitrary field. A
well-ordered system S = {fν (x)} of integral functions from K0 shall be called progressive (with
respect to K0 ) if f0 (x) does not split completely in K0 and if, among the remaining functions
fν (x), none is subordinated to the segment of S determined by it (§ 18).
   1. If S is a well-ordered system of integral functions from K0 , not all of which split completely
in K0 , then S contains a progressive subsystem S ′ which is equivalent to S.
    Indeed, form a subsystem S ′ of S as follows: include the first function f0 (x) in S ′ if it does
not split completely in K0 , and include any other function if it is not subordinated to the segment
of S determined by it. It is then clear, first, that the first function in S which does not split
completely in K0 belongs to S ′ , and also that S ′ is progressive and subordinate to S. It remains
only to show that every function in S = {fν (x)} is subordinate to S ′ . This is immediate for
f0 (x), since f0 (x) either splits completely in K0 or belongs to S ′ . To prove the same for every
other function fν (x), we apply complete induction. We may then regard it as proved that the
segment of S determined by fν (x) is subordinate to S ′ . If fν (x) is subordinate to this segment,
then fν (x) is also subordinate to S ′ ; but if fν (x) is not subordinate to the segment just indicated,
then fν (x) belongs to S ′ , and is therefore again subordinate to that system.
    Definition 2. Progressive systems of elements of an extension field. – Let K0 be
an arbitrary field, Ω any extension of K0 , and S = {aν } a well-ordered system of elements of
Ω. The system S shall be called progressive if neither a0 belongs to the field K0 , nor does any
of the remaining elements aν belong to the field obtained from K0 by adjoining the segment
determined by aν . – The following theorem holds:
    2. If S = {aν } is a well-ordered system of elements of an extension field Ω of K0 , and not all
elements of S belong to K0 , then S contains a progressive subsystem S′ for which K(S′ ) = K(S).
One can form S′ by including the element a0 in S′ if it does not belong to K0 , and including
any other element aν if it does not belong to the field obtained from K0 by adjoining the segment
of S determined by aν .
    The proof is entirely analogous to that of Theorem 1 and may therefore be omitted. Since Ω
itself can be obtained by adjoining a system S, and since this system can be well-ordered, it
also follows that:
   3. Every extension of a field can be obtained by adjoining a progressive system.
   Definition 3. Well-ordered fields. – We may suppose that the elements of a field K0
have been put into a well-ordered sequence {cν } (0 ≤ ν < σ). Under this ordering the field
K0 is assigned a definite ordinal number σ. We shall, however, explicitly make the convention
that, whenever a well-ordered field K0 = {cν } is spoken of, one always has c0 = 0, c1 = ε. If
two well-ordered fields have the same ordinal number, then there is between them a unique
well-defined similar relation (§ 19, 5.). If that relation is also an isomorphism, we call the fields
similar-isomorphic.
    4. Let {Kµ } (0 ≤ µ < σ) be a well-ordered sequence of well-ordered fields, let σ be a limit
number, and suppose that, for any two fields in this sequence, the earlier one is always similar-
isomorphic to a segment of the later one. Then there are well-ordered fields Ω with the following
property: each field Kµ is similar-isomorphic to a segment of Ω, and for each element of Ω a
segment can be specified which contains this element and is similar-isomorphic to some field Kµ .
All fields Ω having the indicated properties are similar-isomorphic to one another.
   Proof. Let the field Kµ of the sequence {Kµ } have ordinal number τµ , and let its elements in
their well-ordered sequence be denoted by cµν (0 ≤ ν < τµ ). From our hypotheses it follows that
the numbers τµ increase with µ and that there is no largest among them. We denote by τ the



                                                  61
Ernst Steinitz                                                                          English translation, §§ 1–20


upper bound of the numbers τµ (§ 19, 5.):
                                                τ = lim τµ
                                                        µ→σ

and take a well-ordered system Ω = {cλ } (0 ≤ λ < τ ), for which we define addition and
multiplication as follows. If cλ , cρ (λ ≤ ρ) are any two elements of Ω, then from ρ < τ it follows
that among the ordinal numbers τµ of the fields Kµ there are some which are > ρ. Let τµ′ be
the smallest of these. The field Kµ′ = {cµ′ ν } (0 ≤ ν < τµ′ ) then contains the two elements cµ′ λ ,
cµ′ ρ , as well as their sum and their product. If
                              cµ′ λ + cµ′ ρ = cµ′ α ,         cµ′ λ · cµ′ ρ = cµ′ β ,                            (1)
then α < τµ′ < τ , β < τµ′ < τ ; hence the system Ω contains two elements cα , cβ . We stipulate
that
                        cλ + cρ = cρ + cλ = cα ,    cλ · cρ = cρ · cλ = cβ                   (2)
shall hold. This makes Ω into a system with double composition.
   Now let Kµ be any field in the sequence {Kµ }. Since τµ < τ , Ω has a segment Ωµ of ordinal
number τµ . In the similar relation πµ between Kµ and Ωµ , the elements cµλ and cλ (0 ≤ λ < τµ )
correspond to one another. Suppose now that cλ and cρ (λ ≤ ρ) are any two elements of Ωµ ,
and that their sum and product are given by equations (2.). Then ρ < τµ , and hence, if τµ′ is
again the smallest number in the sequence {τµ } exceeding ρ, one has
                                          τµ′ ≤ τµ ,          µ′ ≤ µ.                                            (3)
By the stipulations made for the compositions in Ω, equations (2.) entail equations (1.). From
(3.) it follows that Kµ′ is either identical with Kµ or similar-isomorphic to a segment of Kµ . In
both cases (1.) implies
                                cµλ + cµρ = cµα ,    cµλ · cµρ = cµβ .                         (4)
Since the elements cµα , cµβ again belong to the field Kµ , one has α < τµ , β < τµ , and therefore
the elements cα , cβ again belong to the segment Ωµ of Ω. Comparison of (2.) and (4.) also
shows that the similar relation πµ between Kµ and Ωµ is an isomorphism. Thus Ωµ represents
a field similar-isomorphic to Kµ . Since for every element cλ of Ω one can choose τµ > λ, every
element of Ω occurs in some field Ωµ ; and since of any two of these fields one contains the other,
Ω itself is a field. As shown, it satisfies the conditions of Theorem 4.
      Let Ω′ = {c′λ } be another field satisfying these conditions, let τ ′ be its ordinal number, and
let Ω′µ be the segment similar-isomorphic to Kµ . Then the ordinal number of Ω′µ is τµ , whence
τµ < τ ′ . Conversely, if λ is any ordinal number < τ ′ , then Ω′ contains an element c′λ ; this occurs
in some segment Ω′µ , so that λ < τµ . Hence τ ′ = limµ→σ τµ = τ , and there is a similar relation π
between Ω and Ω′ which assigns to each element cλ of Ω the element c′λ of Ω′ . If the composition
equations (2.) hold for any two elements cλ , cρ (λ ≤ ρ) of Ω, and if µ is chosen so large that
τµ > ρ, then the field Ωµ contains the elements cλ , cρ , and hence also cα and cβ . The fields
Ωµ and Ω′µ are similar-isomorphic to Kµ , and therefore also to one another. Under the similar
relation between Ωµ and Ω′µ , the elements cλ , cρ , cα , cβ of Ωµ are assigned the elements c′λ , c′ρ ,
c′α , c′β of Ω′µ . Since this relation is also an isomorphism, it follows that

                                     c′λ + c′ρ = c′α ,         c′λ c′ρ = c′β .
Thus the similar relation π between Ω and Ω′ is itself an isomorphism, and this proves (4.)
completely.
   Definition 4. Well-ordering of the integral functions in a well-ordered field. – Let
K0 = {cν } (c0 = 0, c1 = ε) be a well-ordered field, and let g(x) and h(x) be two distinct integral
functions from K0 . We write them in the form of infinite series
                                  g(x) = cµ0 + cµ1 x + cµ2 x2 + · · · ,

                                                        62
Ernst Steinitz                                                           English translation, §§ 1–20


                                 h(x) = cν0 + cν1 x + cν2 x2 + · · · .
Then, once the natural number n exceeds a certain value,
                               cµn = cνn = 0 = c0 ,       µn = νn = 0
will hold. If k (≥ 0) is the largest number for which µk ̸= νk , then in the case µk < νk we say
that the function g(x) precedes the function h(x) within K0 . This convention turns the system
of integral functions from K0 into a well-ordered system. Indeed, let S be any system of integral
functions from K0 . Since c0 = 0, the functions of least degree in S precede the others. Let n be
this degree; let Sn be the subsystem of S consisting of the functions of degree n; let Sn−1 be the
system of functions in Sn in which the coefficient cν of xn has the smallest possible index ν; let
Sn−2 be the system of those functions in Sn−1 in which the coefficient of xn−1 has the smallest
possible index; and so on. Finally, let f (x) be the function in S0 for which the constant term
has the smallest possible index. Then f (x) is the first function of S. The existence of a first
function inside every system S of functions proves the asserted well-ordering.
    Definition 5. Primitive well-ordering. – Let K0 = {cν } be a well-ordered field, let K1
be a simple algebraic extension of degree n (n > 1) of K0 , and let j be a primitive element of
K1 . Every element of K1 is then represented uniquely in the form g(j), where g(x) denotes any
integral function from K0 of degree < n. For any two elements g(j) and h(j), stipulate that g(j)
is the earlier one if the function g(x) precedes the function h(x) within K0 . By the preceding
discussion it is clear that this makes K1 into a well-ordered field. From c0 = 0 it follows that the
well-ordered field K0 represents a segment of the well-ordered field K1 ; from c1 = ε it follows that
j is the first element following the segment K0 . We say: K1 is primitively ordered with respect
to K0 , and we call j the principal element of the primitive well-ordering. – Then the following
theorem holds:
    5. If K1 is a simple algebraic extension of a well-ordered field K0 , and j is a primitive
element, then K1 can be ordered primitively with respect to K0 in one and only one way such
that j becomes the principal element. Then K0 is the segment of K1 determined by j.
    Definition 6. Regular well-ordering. – Let K0 be a well-ordered field and let Ω be an
arbitrary algebraic extension of K0 . We shall assume that Ω is also well-ordered, and that this
well-ordering has the following properties. The field K0 , and also every field obtained from K0
by adjoining a segment of Ω, shall be a segment of Ω whenever it does not contain all elements
of Ω. The segments of Ω so obtained – plainly, all those segments containing K0 which are at
the same time fields – shall be called principal segments; the element immediately following a
principal segment will be called the corresponding principal element. The principal elements
form a well-ordered subset J = {jν } (0 ≤ ν < σ) of Ω. The field K0 is the principal segment
determined by j0 ; in general we shall denote by Kν (0 ≤ ν < σ) the principal segment determined
by jν , and by Kσ the field Ω itself. – From the preceding assumptions it follows that every
field Kν (jν ) (0 ≤ ν < σ) also represents a principal segment (or is equal to Kσ = Ω). We now
make the additional assumption that Kν (jν ) is primitively ordered with respect to Kν . Thus jν
appears as the principal element of the primitive ordering. – If the well-ordered field Ω has all
these properties, we call it regularly ordered with respect to K0 . – The primitive well-ordering is
therefore the simplest case of the regular one, characterized by σ = 1.
   The preceding explanations immediately imply several facts, which we therefore record
without proof:
    6. If the field Ω = Kσ is regularly ordered with respect to K0 , and Kν (0 ≤ ν < σ) is a
principal segment, then both Kν with respect to K0 and Ω with respect to Kν are regularly ordered.
If here J = {jµ } (0 ≤ µ < σ) is the system of principal elements of Ω with respect to K0 , J′ is
the segment of J determined by jν , and J′′ is the corresponding remainder, then J′ represents the
system of principal elements of Kν with respect to K0 , while J′′ represents the system of principal
elements of Ω with respect to Kν .

                                                  63
Ernst Steinitz                                                            English translation, §§ 1–20


   7. If Ω is regularly ordered with respect to K0 , and M is regularly ordered with respect to Ω,
then M is regularly ordered with respect to K0 , and Ω is a principal segment of M.
    Keep the notation of Definition 6, and let Ω′ denote any field between K0 and Ω. Suppose
that Ω′ is different from Ω, let a be the first element of Ω not belonging to Ω′ , and let A be the
segment of Ω determined by a. Then Ω′ contains the field K0 (A), which by Definition 6 is a
principal segment of Ω. Since K0 (A) contains the segment A but not the element a following it,
a must be a principal element. Hence, if Ω′ is to contain all principal elements, then one must
have Ω′ = Ω, and it follows that K0 (J) = Ω. Moreover, let Jν (0 < ν < σ) denote the segment of
J determined by the principal element jν , and put Ω′ = K0 (Jν ). Then Ω′ is part of Kν , since Kν
contains the system Jν . Since, moreover, jν does not occur in Kν and therefore also not in Ω′ ,
and since the first element a of Ω not contained in Ω′ must be a principal element, it follows
that a = jν and Ω′ = Kν = K0 (Jν ). Taking Definition 2 into account, we thus obtain:
   8. If the field Ω is regularly ordered with respect to K0 , then the principal elements form a
progressive system J, one has Ω = K0 (J), and the principal segment of Ω determined by the
principal element jν is obtained from K0 by adjoining the segment of J determined by jν .
   Keeping the same notation, let a be any element of Ω, and let Kν (0 ≤ ν ≤ σ) be the first
principal segment of Ω containing a, or, if no such segment exists, the field Ω = Kσ itself. If
ν > 0, then from Kν = K0 (Jν ) it follows that there must be a finite subsystem S of Jν such that
the element a already occurs in K0 (S). If jµ is the last element of S, then µ < ν. Furthermore,
there can be no ordinal number ρ for which µ < ρ < ν. Otherwise S would be part of Jρ , and
a would be an element of K0 (Jρ ) = Kρ , contrary to the assumption made about Kν . Hence
ν = µ + 1, and we have the theorem:
   9. Let {Kν } (0 ≤ ν ≤ σ) be the system of principal segments of the field Ω = Kσ regularly
ordered with respect to K0 , and let Kν be the first field in the sequence {Kν } (0 ≤ ν ≤ σ) which
contains an arbitrarily given element a of Ω. Then ν cannot be a limit number.
   From this it follows easily that:
    10. The regular well-ordering of a field Ω is completely determined by the well-ordering of the
base field K0 and by the well-ordered system J = Jσ = {jν } (0 ≤ ν < σ) of principal elements.
    Indeed, suppose that we had two different regular well-orderings of Ω. Denote them by
Ω′ = {c′λ } and Ω′′ = {c′′λ }, and denote by K′ν , K′′ν (0 ≤ ν < σ) their principal segments
corresponding to the segments Jν of the system J; put Ω′ = K′σ , Ω′′ = K′′σ . Then the fields K′ν , K′′ν ,
if one disregards the order of their elements, are of course identical, namely equal to K0 (Jν ). But
if the equality sign is also to express agreement in the ordering, then certainly K′σ ̸= K′′σ , whereas
K′0 = K0 = K′′0 . Let c′λ be the first element of Ω′ which no longer has the same index inside Ω′′ ,
and let K′ν be the first field of the sequence {K′ν } (0 < ν ≤ σ) containing the element c′λ . Then
ν > 0, and by 9. ν is not a limit number. We have K′ν ̸= K′′ν , but K′ν−1 = K′′ν−1 . However, by
the rules of regular well-ordering, K′ν = K′ν−1 (jν−1 ) must be primitively ordered with respect
to K′ν−1 , and K′′ν = K′′ν−1 (jν−1 ) must be primitively ordered with respect to K′′ν−1 = K′ν−1 ; in
both cases jν−1 is the principal element. It follows from 5. that K′ν = K′′ν , and we obtain a
contradiction. Thus 10. is proved.
    11. Let Ω be an algebraic extension of the well-ordered field K0 , let J = Jσ = {jν } (0 ≤ ν < σ)
be a progressive system of elements of Ω, and suppose that K0 (J) = Ω. Then there is one and only
one regular well-ordering of Ω with respect to K0 having J as its system of principal elements.
   The assertion that there cannot be more than one well-ordering of the indicated kind is
precisely Theorem 10. That there is one at all is expressed, in the case σ = 1, by Theorem
5. For σ > 1 we prove this by induction. – If σ is not a limit number, first order the field
Kσ−1 = K0 (Jσ−1 ) regularly with respect to K0 , in such a way that Jσ−1 becomes the system of
principal elements; then order Ω = K0 (J) = Kσ−1 (jσ−1 ) primitively with respect to Kσ−1 , with
jσ−1 as principal element. By 6. and 7., the field Ω so ordered satisfies the required conditions. –


                                                   64
Ernst Steinitz                                                          English translation, §§ 1–20


If σ is a limit number, then first, for each ν < σ, we have a field Kν = K0 (Jν ) which is regularly
ordered with respect to K0 and has Jν as its system of principal elements. If µ < ν < σ, then the
field K0 (Jµ ) occurs as a principal segment of Kν ; by 6. and 7. it is regularly ordered with respect
to K0 and has Jµ as its system of principal elements. By 10. the indicated segment also agrees
with Kµ in the order of its elements. Thus, among the fields in the sequence {Kν } (0 ≤ ν < σ),
each is a segment of all later ones. From this, and because the sequence {Kν } contains no last
field, it is immediately seen that these fields in their totality constitute a well-ordered field
Ω′ of which they are all segments. Since J has no last element, every element of J occurs in
some segment Jν , hence in some field Kν , and therefore in Ω′ ; hence Ω′ contains all elements of
K0 (J) = Ω, and so gives a well-ordering of the field Ω. If A is any segment of Ω′ , a the element
of Ω′ following this segment, and Kν a field in the sequence {Kν } containing a, then K0 (A) is a
principal segment of Kν , hence a field Kµ (µ < ν). Thus adjoining a segment of Ω′ to K0 always
again yields a segment of Ω′ , and the segments so obtained are the fields in the sequence {Kν }
(0 ≤ ν < σ). These therefore form the only principal segments of Ω′ , and the elements from J,
since they follow these segments, are the principal elements. Since none of them is last, Kν (jν ) is
each time again a field in the sequence {Kν } (0 ≤ ν < σ), and as such is regularly ordered with
respect to K0 , hence primitively ordered with respect to Kν . Thus Ω′ is a regular well-ordering
of Ω with respect to K0 , with J as system of principal elements.
   Together with 3., Theorem 11 gives:
    12. Every algebraic extension of a well-ordered field can be regularly ordered with respect to
that field.




                                                 65

Ernst Steinitz - Algebraic Theory of Fields - §§21-22

 21. The Fundamental Theorem of Algebraic Extensions.

Definition 1. Principal functions and principal factors of the regular well-ordering. -- Let $ N=_$ be an algebraic extension of the well-ordered field $_0$, regularly ordered with respect to $_0$, and let $ J= J_=\j_\$ $(0<)$ be the system of principal elements; let $_$ and $ J_$ denote, respectively, the principal segment of $ N$ and the segment of $ J$ determined by $j_$. The element $j_$ is a root of a certain irreducible function $f_(x)$ over $_0$ (with $$ as coefficient of the highest power), and likewise a root of a certain irreducible function $_(x)$ of the field $_$. This $_(x)$ may be equal to $f_(x)$, and for $=0$ is always equal to $f_(x)$; in every case it is a factor of $f_(x)$. We thus arrive at two systems of functions
\[
F_=F=\f_(x)\,    _==\_(x)\    (0 <).
\]
We call the functions $f_(x)$ the principal functions, and the functions $_(x)$ the principal factors of the regular well-ordering, and denote by $F_$ and $_$ the segments of $F$ and $$ determined by $f_(x)$ and $_(x)$, respectively ($1$). [Footnote: To avoid misunderstandings, we add that within $F$ the functions $f_(x)$ have a definite order, indicated by the index. This order of course has nothing to do with the order assigned to functions in $_0$ by  20, Def. 4.] -- With this terminology the following is immediate.

1. If all principal functions are normal (with respect to $_0$), then the regularly ordered field $ N=_$ is itself normal. It is just large enough to split completely the system $F$ of principal functions; likewise each principal segment $_$ is normal and is just sufficient for the splitting of $F_$. The system $F$ is progressive.

Indeed, each of the normal functions $f_(x)$ $(0 <)$ from $F_$ $(0<)$ has in $_=_0( J_)$ a root $j_$; hence it must split completely in $_$. Since the field $_$ arises from $_0$ solely by adjoining roots of functions from $F_$, it is just sufficient for the splitting of $F_$, and is therefore normal. Moreover, if $<$, the field $_$ no longer contains the element $j_$; thus $f_(x)$ does not split completely in $_$, and so $F$ is a progressive system.

Definition 2. Normal well-ordering. -- Let $ N$ be a normal extension of the well-ordered field $_0$; let $ N$ be regularly ordered with respect to $_0$, and suppose that all principal functions are normal. Keeping the letters in the same meaning as before, $j_$ $(0<)$ is a root of the irreducible function $_(x)$ over $_$, and $_(x)$ is a factor of the function $f_(x)$ irreducible over $_0$. Since $_$ is a well-ordered field, Def. 4 of  20 assigns a definite order also to the functions inside $_$. This therefore also applies to the irreducible factors that $f_(x)$ has inside $_$. We shall now assume that every function $_(x)$, unless it is the sole irreducible factor of $f_(x)$ inside $_$, precedes the remaining irreducible factors of $f_(x)$ inside $_$. If this condition is fulfilled, we say that $ N$ is normally ordered with respect to $_0$. Thus normal well-ordering is a special case of regular well-ordering.

Definition 3. Distinguished roots of the principal functions belonging to a normal well-ordering. -- Let $ N$ be a normal and normally ordered extension of the well-ordered field $_0$, and let the symbols used so far keep their meanings. Since the principal function $f_(x)$ is normal with respect to $_0$, the field $_(j_)$ can be obtained by adjoining to $_$ any root of $f_(x)$. All these roots are primitive elements of the field $_(j_)$ over $_$; their degree is equal to the degree of the principal factor $_(x)$, which in any case is greater than 1. In the case of imperfect fields the roots of $_(x)$ need not all be distinct. Suppose therefore that $_(x)$ has $r$ distinct roots $j_,j_',,j_^(r-1)$ and has degree $n$; then $n r1$, $n>1$. If now $i_$ is any root of $f_(x)$ (in the field $ N$), then we obtain all elements of the field $_(i_)$ by replacing $x$ by $i_$ in all integral functions $g(x)$ over $_$ whose degree is smaller than $n$. Among these functions there are $r$ which, for $x=i_$, become roots of $_(x)$. By Def. 4 of  20 these $r$ functions have a definite order within $_$. If $(x)$ is the first among them and if $(i_)=j_$, then we call $i_$ a distinguished root of $f_(x)$. (We also use this designation when $r=1$, which can occur only for imperfect fields.) The following holds.

2. The principal element $j_$ is a distinguished root of $f_(x)$, and among the roots of the principal factor $_(x)$ there is no other distinguished one.

Indeed, since the roots $j_,j_',,j_^(r-1)$ of $_(x)$ do not occur in $_$, the $r$ functions over $_$ that for $x=i_$ become these roots all have degree at least 1. From the fact that the well-ordered field $_$ begins with the elements $0,$, it follows that among all functions over $_$ of degree $1$, the first is $x$. Thus, if for $i_$ we choose one of the roots of $_(x)$, then $x$ is the first function over $_$ which for $x=i_$ becomes a root of $_(x)$. But this root is equal to $j_$ if and only if we choose $i_=j_$, proving the assertion. -- From 2. one further obtains:

3. In the case $_(x)=f_(x)$, hence in particular for $=0$, $j_$ is the unique distinguished root of $f_(x)$.

We now prove:

4. Let $ N=_0(\mathfrak J)$ be a normal extension of the well-ordered field $_0$. Suppose every element $i_$ of the system $ J_=\mathfrak J=\i_\$ $(0<)$ is a root of a normal function $f_(x)$ over $_0$, and suppose the function system $F_=F=\f_(x)\$ is progressive (or, what here amounts to the same thing, suppose the system $\mathfrak J$ is progressive). Then the field $ N$ can be normally ordered with respect to $_0$ in one and only one way so that $F$ is the system of principal functions and the elements $i_$ become distinguished roots of the corresponding principal functions $f_(x)$.

We first show that two distinct normal orderings of the indicated kind cannot exist. Assume that there are two such normal orderings $ N'$ and $ N''$ of the field $ N$. Denote by $ J_'= J'=\j_'\$, $\_'\$, $_'='=\_'(x)\$ the systems of principal elements, principal segments, and principal factors of $ N'$, and by $ J_''= J''=\j_''\$, $\_''\$, $_''=''=\_''(x)\$ the corresponding systems for $ N''$. Let $\mathfrak J_$, $F_$, $ J_'$, $ J_''$, $_'$, $_''$ denote the segments of $\mathfrak J$, $F$, and so on determined by $i_$, $f_(x)$, and so forth. Then $_'$ and $_''$ are two normal orderings of the same field $_0(\mathfrak J_)=_0( J_')=_0( J_'')$, which is just sufficient for splitting the system $F_$. Since $i_0$ is to be a distinguished element of $f_0(x)$, it follows by 3. that $j_0'=i_0=j_0''$. If the equality $j_'=j_''$ does not hold for every index, take the least one for which $j_' j_''$. Then $ J_'= J_''$, and since $ J_'$ and $ J_''$ are the systems of principal elements of the fields $_'$, $_''$ regularly ordered with respect to $_0$, we have (also taking order into account) $_'=_''$ ( 20, 10.). It follows further that $_'(x)=_''(x)$, because $_'(x)$ and $_''(x)$ are the first irreducible factor of $f_(x)$ inside $_'=_''$. If, furthermore, inside $_'=_''$, $(x)$ is the first function that for $x=i_$ becomes a root of $_'(x)=_''(x)$, then, since $i_$ is to be a distinguished root of $f_(x)$, we get $j_'=(i_)=j_''$, contrary to the assumption $j_' j_''$. Hence $ J'= J''$, and from  20, 10. it follows that $ N'= N''$.

It remains to show that a normal ordering of the required kind exists. -- For $=1$ we obtain it by ordering $ N$ primitively with respect to $_0$, with $i_0$ as principal element. For $>1$ the proof is by induction. If $$ is not a limit number, let $_-1$ denote the normal ordering of the field $_0(\mathfrak J_-1)$ for which $F_-1$ is the system of principal functions and every element $i_$ $(<-1)$ is a distinguished root of $f_(x)$. If then, within the well-ordered field $_-1$, $_-1(x)$ is the first irreducible factor of $f_-1(x)$, and $(x)$ is the first function that for $x=i_-1$ becomes a root of $_-1(x)$, put $(i_-1)=j_-1$ and order $ N$ primitively with respect to $_-1$, with $j_-1$ as principal element. This plainly gives the required normal ordering. -- If $$ is a limit number, then for every $<$ let $_$ be the normal ordering of the field $_0(\mathfrak J_)$ for which $F_$ is the system of principal functions, while every element $i_$ $(<)$ is a distinguished root of $f_(x)$. A simple consideration then shows that each field of the sequence $\_\$ $(0<)$ is a segment of every later one, and that the totality of the elements occurring in these fields yields a well-ordering of $ N$ satisfying all conditions of the problem.

5. Let $_0$ and $\K_0$ be similarly isomorphic fields. Let $ N=_$ be a normal and normally ordered extension of $_0$, and $\mathfrak N=\K_$ such an extension of $\K_0$. Let $F=\f_(x)\$ and $ F=\ f_(x)\$ $(0<)$ be the corresponding systems of principal functions, and suppose that the similarly isomorphic correspondence $_0$ between $_0$ and $\K_0$ assigns the functions $f_(x)$ and $ f_(x)$ to one another. Then $ N$ and $\mathfrak N$ are similarly isomorphic.

Proof by induction. If $=1$, if $n$ is the degree of $f_0(x)$ and $ f_0(x)$, and if $j_0$, $ j_0$ are the principal elements, then every element of $ N$ or $\mathfrak N$ is obtained by replacing $x$ by $j_0$ or $ j_0$ in all functions $g(x)$ or $ g(x)$ over $_0$ or $\K_0$ of degree smaller than $n$. The functions $g(x)$ in $_0$ and the functions $ g(x)$ in $\K_0$ have definite orders, and since $_0$ is a similar correspondence between $_0$ and $\K_0$, it follows at once that the correspondence between the functions over $_0$ and $\K_0$ induced by $_0$ is also similar. Further, from  20, Def. 5, we obtain a similar correspondence $_1$ between $ N=_0(j_0)$ and $\mathfrak N=\K_0( j_0)$ extending $_0$, by making the element $ g( j_0)$ of $\mathfrak N$ correspond to the element $g(j_0)$ of $ N$, where $ g(x)$ denotes the function over $\K_0$ corresponding under $_0$ to $g(x)$ over $_0$. Since $_0$ is moreover an isomorphism, it follows, as in  8, 1., that $_1$ is also an isomorphism. -- If $>1$ and if $_$, $\K_$ $(<)$ denote the principal segments of $ N$ and $\mathfrak N$, then $_$ and $\K_$ are normal and normally ordered extensions of $_0$ and $\K_0$ whose principal functions are carried into each other by $_0$. We may therefore regard it as proved that $_$ and $\K_$ are similarly isomorphic, i.e. that the unique similar correspondence $_$ between $_$ and $\K_$ is also an isomorphism. If $<<$, then $_$ and $\K_$ are corresponding segments of $_$ and $\K_$, and hence are mapped similarly onto one another by $_$, just as by $_$. Thus $_$ is a part of $_$. If $$ is a limit number, so that every element of $ N$ or $\mathfrak N$ occurs in some field $_$ or $\K_$, it follows that the correspondences $_$ determine a one-to-one mapping $_$ from $ N$ onto $\mathfrak N$. A simple consideration shows that $_$ is similar, because each $_$ is similar; likewise $_$ is an isomorphism, because the $_$ are isomorphisms. -- If $$ is not a limit number, then first there is the similarly isomorphic correspondence $_-1$ between $_-1$ and $\K_-1$ extending $_0$, and it assigns the principal functions $f_-1(x)$ and $ f_-1(x)$ to one another. Moreover, $_-1$ transforms the principal factor $_-1(x)$, the first factor of $f_-1(x)$ inside $_-1$, into the first factor of $ f_-1(x)$ inside $\K_-1$, namely $_-1(x)$. The fields $ N$ and $\mathfrak N$ are normal and normally ordered extensions of $_-1$ and $\K_-1$ with only one principal function, $_-1(x)$ and $_-1(x)$ respectively. Since $_-1$ and $\K_-1$ are mapped similarly and isomorphically by $_-1$ and $_-1$ also carries the principal functions into one another, the existence of the similarly isomorphic correspondence between $ N$ and $\mathfrak N$ follows as in the case $=1$.

Letting in Theorem 5 $_0$ and $\K_0$ coincide as one and the same well-ordered field, we obtain:

6. If $ N$ and $\mathfrak N$ are normal and normally ordered extensions of the well-ordered field $_0$ and the same system $\f_(x)\$ of principal functions belongs to both, then $ N$ and $\mathfrak N$ are similarly isomorphic.

7. If $_0$ is a well-ordered field and $F=F_=\f_(x)\$ $(0<)$ is a progressive system of normal functions over $_0$, then there exist normal and normally ordered extensions of $_0$ with $F$ as their system of principal functions.

Proof by induction. In the case $=1$, by  8, 1. we can determine an extension $ N$ that is just sufficient for the splitting of $f_0(x)$. It is normal; and since $f_0(x)$ is normal, we have $ N=_0(j_0)$ if $j_0$ is any root of $f_0(x)$ in $ N$. If we order $ N$ primitively with respect to $_0$ so that $j_0$ is principal element, then it is immediately clear that $ N$ satisfies the conditions of the theorem. -- If $>1$ and is not a limit number, let $_-1$ be a normal and normally ordered extension of $_0$ with principal-function system $F_-1=\f_(x)\$ $(0<-1)$. Among the irreducible factors that the normal function $f_-1(x)$ has in the well-ordered field $_-1$, let $_-1(x)$ be the first. Its degree must be greater than 1, because $_-1$ is just sufficient for the splitting of $F_-1$ (Theorem 1) and the normal-function system $F$ is progressive. If one extends $_-1$ by adjoining a root $j_-1$ of $_-1(x)$ to a field $ N$ and orders this field primitively with respect to $_-1$ with $j_-1$ as principal element, then $ N$ plainly satisfies the conditions of Theorem 7. -- If $$ is a limit number, let $_'$ $(0<<)$ be a normal and normally ordered extension of $_0$ with principal-function system $F_=\f_(x)\$ $(0<)$. If $<$, then $_'$ has a principal segment that is normal and normally ordered with respect to $_0$ and has principal-function system $F_$. By 6 this segment must be similarly isomorphic to $_'$. Thus, among the fields of the sequence $_0,\_'\$ $(0<<)$, each is similarly isomorphic to a segment of every later one. Hence ( 20, 4.) there is a well-ordered field $\mathfrak N$ such that $_0$ is similarly isomorphic to a segment $\K_0$, each field $_'$ $(0<<)$ is similarly isomorphic to a segment $\K_$ of $\mathfrak N$, and every element of $\mathfrak N$ occurs in some such segment $\K_$. Since a similarly isomorphic correspondence exists between $_0$ and $\K_0$, it follows that one obtains a field $ N$ similarly isomorphic to $\mathfrak N$, and at the same time an extension field of $_0$, by replacing the segment $\K_0$ of $\mathfrak N$ by the well-ordered system $_0$ and requiring that every composition equation $(a+b=c,\ a b=d)$ in $\mathfrak N$ become a composition equation in $ N$, whenever the elements of $\K_0$ that may occur in it are substituted by the corresponding elements of $_0$. By this substitution each segment $\K_$ of $\mathfrak N$ passes into a segment $_$ of $ N$ similarly isomorphic to it, and hence also to $_'$, and every element of $ N$ occurs in such segments $_$. Through the similarly isomorphic correspondence $_$ between $_'$ and $_$, all order relations and equations of one field are carried into correct order relations and equations of the other. Since $_$ does not alter the elements of $_0$, nor therefore the functions of the system $F$, $_$, like $_'$, is a normal and normally ordered extension of $_0$ with $F_$ as principal-function system. From the fact that the field $ N$ is composed of the elements of the field sequence $\_\$, and that each field of this sequence is a segment of every later one and a segment of $ N$, it is immediately clear that $ N$ itself is normally ordered with respect to $_0$, and that $F$ is the corresponding system of principal functions.

From what has gone before one easily obtains the fundamental theorem:

8. If $_0$ is an arbitrary field and $S$ is an arbitrary system of integral functions over $_0$, then there is an extension of $_0$, unique up to equivalence, which is just large enough to split all functions of the system $S$ into linear factors.

Proof. For the question considered here, the system $S$ may be replaced by any equivalent system ( 18, 3.); hence it may be assumed that $S$ contains only normal functions ( 18, 6.). Moreover we may regard $S$ as well-ordered and, if it is not progressive, replace it by an equivalent progressive subsystem ( 20, 1.). Thus from the outset we may assume that a progressive system of normal functions $F=\f_(x)\$ is given. It is further permissible to suppose that the field $_0$ is well-ordered. But then by 7. there is a normal and normally ordered extension $ N$ of $_0$ with $F$ as principal-function system, and by 1. this extension is just sufficient for the complete splitting of $F$. -- Now suppose that there is a second extension $\mathfrak N$ of $_0$ which is just sufficient for the complete splitting of $F$. We must prove the equivalence of the extensions $ N$ and $\mathfrak N$. For this purpose we use the principle of choice. Namely, from the roots that the functions $f_(x)$ have in $\mathfrak N$, select one for each $$, so that we obtain a system $\mathfrak J=\i_\$ where $i_$ is a root of $f_(x)$. Since these are normal functions, $\mathfrak N=_0(\mathfrak J)$. By 4. $\mathfrak N$ can be normally ordered with respect to $_0$ so that $F$ becomes the system of principal functions (and so that the elements $i_$ become distinguished roots of the principal functions. This latter point is now of no further importance, but without it Theorem 4 could not have been proved). Thus $ N$ and $\mathfrak N$ are normal and normally ordered extensions of $_0$ with the same system of principal functions, and there exists between them a similarly isomorphic correspondence $$ (Theorem 6). Since under this correspondence every element of the common segment $_0$ is assigned to itself, the extensions $ N$ and $\mathfrak N$ are equivalent.

By specialization, 8. further gives:

9. Every field can be extended algebraically to an algebraically closed field, and essentially in only one way. -- In this way to every arbitrary field type there corresponds a definite closed one.

Indeed, if by $S$ we understand the system of all integral functions over $_0$, then an extension field of $_0$ is algebraically closed and algebraic over $_0$ if and only if it is just sufficient for the splitting of $S$. Hence the first part of 9. follows from 8. -- Let any field type be given; let $_0$ and $_0'$ be two fields of this type, and let $$ and $'$ be algebraic and algebraically closed extensions of $_0$ and $_0'$. We must show that $$ and $'$ are of the same type. To this end introduce a system $ S$ of new elements, which we put in one-to-one correspondence with the elements of $'$ that do not belong to $_0'$. This assignment, together with an isomorphism $_0$ between $_0$ and $_0'$, gives a mapping $_1$ between $'$ and $=_0+ S$. If we require that under $_1$ every composition equation $a'+b'=c'$, $a' b'=d'$ from $'$, even when $a'$ and $b'$ do not both belong to $_0'$, shall pass into a composition equation in $$, then $$ becomes a field isomorphic to $'$, hence algebraically closed, and is an algebraic extension of $_0$. Therefore, by the first part of 9. already proved, $$ and $$ are equivalent extensions of $_0$, and we have an isomorphic correspondence $_1$ between $$ and $$ that leaves the elements of $_0$ unchanged. The desired isomorphic correspondence between $$ and $'$ is obtained from $_1$ and $_1$. It is an extension of the isomorphism $_0$ existing between $_0$ and $_0'$.

 22. Transcendental Extensions. Algebraic Dependence Among Elements of an Extension Field.

Every non-algebraic extension of a field will be called transcendental. -- In the following investigations, which are meant to lead us to a clear classification of all fields, we fix a field $$ and refer to it expressions such as ``extension field,'' ``transcendental,'' and so on, unless something else is expressly stated. If $ S$ is a system of elements of an extension field $$, and $a$ is an element of $$, we call $a$ algebraically dependent on $ S$ (with respect to $$) if $a$ is algebraic over the field $( S)$. We call a system of elements $ S'$ algebraically dependent on $ S$ if every element of $ S'$ is algebraically dependent on $ S$.

1. If the element $a$ is algebraically dependent on the system $ S$, then there is a finite subsystem $ S'$ of $ S$ on which $a$ is algebraically dependent.

For our assumption implies that $a$ is a root of an integral function $(x)$ of the field $( S)$. Since $(x)$ has only finitely many coefficients, there is a finite subsystem $ S'$ of $ S$ such that these coefficients already occur in $( S')$. Then $a$ is algebraically dependent on $ S'$.

2. If $ S_3$ is algebraically dependent on $ S_2$, and $ S_2$ on $ S_1$, then $ S_3$ is algebraically dependent on $ S_1$.

Indeed, put $( S_1)=_1$, $( S_2)=_2$. It follows from our assumption that $_1( S_2)$ is algebraic over $_1$, and $_2( S_3)$ is algebraic over $_2$ ( 7, 7.). Since $_2$ is a subfield of $_1( S_2)$, the elements of $_2( S_3)$ are algebraic over $_1( S_2)$, hence also over $_1=( S_1)$ ( 7, 9.). Therefore the elements of $ S_3$ are algebraic over $( S_1)$, as required.

Accordingly, if we call two systems $ S_1, S_2$ algebraically equivalent (with respect to $$), or simply equivalent, when each is algebraically dependent on the other, then any two systems equivalent to a third are equivalent to each other, and so on.

We call a system $ S$ of elements of an extension field algebraically reducible (with respect to $$), or simply reducible, if it is equivalent to a proper part of itself or consists of a single element algebraic over $$; otherwise we call $ S$ (algebraically) irreducible. It is immediately clear from this definition that in a reducible system containing more than one element, at least one element occurs which is algebraically dependent on the system of the remaining elements. In conjunction with 1. this gives at once:

3. Every subsystem of an irreducible system is irreducible.

4. Every reducible system contains a finite reducible subsystem.

Purely transcendental extensions. -- We call an extension of a field purely transcendental if it can be obtained by adjoining an irreducible system $ S$. If $ S$ consists of only finitely many elements $x_1,x_2,,x_n$, then we have an extension of the kind considered at the end of  5: the field $( S)$ consists of rational functions of the transcendentals, or indeterminates, $x_1,x_2,,x_n$ with coefficients in $$. If the system $ S$ is infinite, then $( S)$ consists of the elements of all fields $( S')$, where $ S'$ ranges over finite subsystems of $ S$. The most general purely transcendental extension is therefore obtained by introducing an arbitrary system $ S$ of infinitely many ``indeterminates.'' Each finite subsystem $ S'$ of $ S$ then gives an extension $( S')$ of the kind previously considered, and the totality of all fields $( S')$ constitutes a field ( 2, 2.) which arises from $$ by adjoining the irreducible system $ S$. -- Suppose now we have two extensions $( S_1)$, $( S_2)$, where $ S_1$ and $ S_2$ are irreducible systems and the finite or infinite number of their elements (cardinal number, cardinality) is the same; that is, suppose a one-to-one correspondence $$ can be established between their elements. Then there is a definite isomorphism $$ between $( S_1)$ and $( S_2)$ under which every element of $$ corresponds to itself and the elements of $ S_1$ and $ S_2$ correspond in the same way as under $$. This was shown in  5 for finite systems, and in the infinite case follows at once from the same result by a simple consideration. Thus:

5. Two purely transcendental extensions $( S_1)$, $( S_2)$ of a field $$, in which the irreducible systems $ S_1$, $ S_2$ contain equally many elements, are equivalent.

6. If an irreducible system $ S$ becomes reducible upon adding an element $a$, then $a$ is algebraically dependent on $ S$.

For the reducible system $ S+a$ contains a finite reducible system $ T$. The element $a$ must occur in $ T$, since otherwise $ T$ would be a part of $ S$ and hence irreducible. Let $ T= T'+a$, and suppose $ T'$ consists of the elements $x_1,x_2,,x_n$. Since $ T'$ is irreducible, every field in the sequence
\[
,
   _1=(x_1),
   _2=_1(x_2),
   ,
   _n=_n-1(x_n)=( T')
\]
is transcendental over the preceding one. If $_n(a)$ were also transcendental over $_n$, then ( 5, 9.) every element of $ T$ would be algebraically independent of the system of the remaining elements, so that $ T$ would be irreducible. Since this is not the case, $a$ is algebraic over $_n=( T')$, hence algebraically dependent on $ T'$ and therefore also on $ S$.

7. Let $ S$ be an irreducible system (with respect to $$), and let $a$ be transcendental over $$ but algebraically dependent on $ S$. Then $ S$ contains a definite finite subsystem $ T$ with the following properties: $a$ is algebraically dependent on $ T$; every subsystem of $ S$ on which $a$ is algebraically dependent contains $ T$; if any element of $ T$ is replaced by $a$, then $ S$ passes into an equivalent irreducible system; none of the other elements of $ S$ has this property.

Proof. Let $ S'$ denote any subsystem of $ S$ on which $a$ is algebraically dependent (not excluding $ S$ itself). Then $ S'$ has finite subsystems on which $a$ is algebraically dependent. Let $ T$ be such a subsystem with as few elements as possible. Let its elements be $_1,_2,,_m$, and let $ T_i$ $(i=1,,m)$ denote the system that remains after omitting $_i$ from $ T$ (in the case $m=1$, the empty system). Since $a$ is algebraically dependent on $ T$ and algebraically independent of each of the systems $ T_i$, the system $ T+a$ is reducible, whereas the systems $ T_i+a$ are irreducible (Theorem 6). This remains true in the case $m=1$, because $a$ is transcendental over $$. Since the irreducible system $ T_i+a$ passes into the reducible system $ T+a$ by adjoining $_i$, the element $_i$ is algebraically dependent on $ T_i+a$, and the systems $ T_i+a$ and $ T+a$ are equivalent. Likewise $ T$ and $ T+a$ are equivalent. Thus we see: The $m+1$ systems $ T_i+a$, $ T$, and $ T+a$, and therefore also any two of them, are equivalent.

We now show that every subsystem $ S''$ of $ S$ on which $a$ is algebraically dependent must contain the system $ T$. To this end let $ U$ be a finite subsystem of $ S''$ with as few elements as possible among those on which $a$ is algebraically dependent, and prove that $ U$ and $ T$ are identical. Suppose $ U$ consists of the elements $_1,,_n$, and let $ U_i$ $(i=1,,n)$ be the system left after omitting $_i$ from $ U$. Then the systems $ U_i+a$ and $ U$ are irreducible and are equivalent to one another and to the reducible system $ U+a$. -- Because $ T$ and $ U$ are smallest systems on which $a$ is algebraically dependent, neither of them can be a proper part of the other. If they were different, we could therefore assume that $_1$ is not in $ U$ and $_1$ is not in $ T$. Let $ B$ be the subsystem of $ S$ containing all elements of $ T$ and all elements of $ U$, and no other elements. Since $ T_1+a$ is equivalent to the system $ T$ contained in $ B$, one obtains from $ B$ a system $ B'$ equivalent to $ B$ by replacing $_1$ by $a$. The system $ B'$ contains $ U+a$, and since this is equivalent to $ U$, one obtains a system $ B''$ equivalent to $ B'$ by omitting the element $a$ from $ B'$. Thus $ B$ would be equivalent to a proper part $ B''$ of itself, hence reducible. But this is impossible, because $ B$ is a part of the irreducible system $ S$.

Thus $ T$ must indeed be contained in every subsystem of $ S$ on which $a$ is algebraically dependent. Therefore, if $ S_i$ $(i=1,,m)$ denotes the system left after omitting $_i$ from $ S$, then $a$ is algebraically independent of the irreducible system $ S_i$, so that $ S_i+a$ is likewise irreducible. But $ S_i+a$ arises from $ S$ by replacing $_i$ by $a$, or, what is the same thing, by replacing $ T= T_i+_i$ by the equivalent system $ T_i+a$. Hence $ S$ and $ S_i+a$ are equivalent systems. Thus: One obtains an irreducible system equivalent to $ S$ by replacing one of the elements of $ T$ by $a$. -- On the other hand, if $$ is an element of $ S$ not occurring in $ T$, and if $ S'$ remains after omitting it, then $ S'$ contains $ T$; hence $a$ is algebraically dependent on $ S'$, and the system $ S'+a$ arising from $ S$ by replacing $$ by $a$ is reducible. It is equivalent to $ S'$, and since $ S'$, as a proper part of the irreducible system $ S$, cannot be equivalent to $ S$, neither can $ S'+a$ be equivalent to $ S$. This completes the proof of 7 in all parts.

8. Let $ U$ and $ B$ be finite irreducible systems of $m$ and $n$ elements, respectively; suppose $n m$ and that $ B$ is algebraically dependent on $ U$. Then, in the case $m=n$, the systems $ U$ and $ B$ are equivalent; in the case $n<m$, $ U$ is equivalent to an irreducible system consisting of $ B$ and $m-n$ elements from $ U$.

Let $u_1,,u_m$ be the elements of $ U$, and $v_1,,v_n$ those of $ B$. Since $v_1$ is transcendental over $$ and algebraically dependent on $ U$, Theorem 7 gives at least one element of $ U$ such that replacing it by $v_1$ changes $ U$ into an equivalent irreducible system. This proves the assertion for $n=1$. For $n>1$ the proof is by complete induction. Let $ B'$ be the system consisting of $v_1,,v_n-1$. Since it is irreducible and algebraically dependent on $ U$, we may regard it as proved that $ U$ is equivalent to an irreducible system $ U'$ consisting of $ B'$ and $m-n+1$ elements from $ U$. The element $v_n$ is algebraically dependent on $ U'$, but not on $ B'$. Hence, if $ T$ is the smallest subsystem of $ U'$ on which $v_n$ is algebraically dependent, then $ T$ contains at least one of the $m-n+1$ elements from $ U$. Replacing such an element by $v_n$ turns $ U'$ into an irreducible system equivalent to $ U$, consisting of $ B$ and $m-n$ elements of $ U$. In the case $m=n$, therefore, $ U$ and $ B$ are equivalent.

We also see from this that an irreducible system $ B$ algebraically dependent on $ U$ cannot contain more than $m$ elements. Otherwise a proper part $ B'$ of $ B$ consisting of $m$ elements would, by what has just been proved, be equivalent to $ U$. Then $ B$ would be algebraically dependent on $ B'$, hence reducible. Thus:

9. An irreducible system $ B$ algebraically dependent on a finite system $ U$ cannot contain more elements than that system; in the case of equal numbers of elements the two systems are equivalent.
