Ernst Steinitz                                                                   English, §§ 23–24


§ 23. Transcendence Degree and the Division of Fields into
Classes.
In the following considerations, in which as before we refer to a ground field K, the well-ordering
theorem again enters into use.
    1. Every system S whose elements are not all algebraic with respect to K is equivalent to an
irreducible subsystem.
   Proof. If S contains algebraic elements, then after omitting them a system equivalent to S
remains, and we may continue with it. We may therefore assume from the outset that every
element of S is transcendental with respect to K. If first S is finite, and T is an equivalent
subsystem of S with as few elements as possible, then T is plainly irreducible.
    If the system S is infinite, we regard it as well-ordered, S = {aν }, and denote by Sν the
segment of S determined by aν . We omit from S every element aν (ν > 0) which is algebraically
dependent on its associated segment Sν . There remains a system S′ which is irreducible and
equivalent to S. First, a0 , since it belongs to S′ , is algebraically dependent on S′ . Suppose
further that it has already been proved that the elements of the segment Sν are algebraically
dependent on S′ . Then the same is true of aν , because aν either is algebraically dependent on
Sν or belongs to S′ . This gives the equivalence of S and S′ . If S′ were reducible, and if L were
a finite reducible subsystem of S′ with as few elements as possible, and aν the last element of L,
then, since aν is transcendental with respect to K, it could not be the sole element of L; and
the system L′ which remains after omitting aν from L, being part of Sν , would be irreducible.
Hence, by § 22, 6, aν would be algebraically dependent on L′ , and therefore on Sν . But then aν
would not belong to S′ , a contradiction. Thus S′ is irreducible, and Theorem 1 is proved.
    Now let Ω = K(S) denote an arbitrary transcendental extension of K. Then S is equivalent
to an irreducible system S′ ; hence the elements of S are algebraic with respect to K(S′ ). Thus
K(S) is an algebraic extension of K(S′ ), while K(S′ ) is a purely transcendental extension of K.
We obtain:
    2. Every transcendental extension of a field can be decomposed into a purely transcendental
extension followed by an algebraic extension.
   Of course such a decomposition can be made in infinitely many ways. Suppose that S1 and
S2 are two irreducible systems in Ω, on which all elements of Ω are algebraically dependent.
Then S1 and S2 are equivalent. If one of these systems is finite, it was shown above that the
other is also finite and contains the same number of elements (§ 22, 9). We shall show that in
the case of infinite systems as well the cardinal numbers agree, and hence, by § 22, 5, that K(S1 )
and K(S2 ) are equivalent extensions of K. For this purpose we first introduce some notation.
   Let {cµ } (0 ≤ µ < τ ) be a well-ordered sequence of elements of an extension field, let τ be a
limit number, and suppose that from a certain µ onward all elements cµ are equal, say equal to
a. We then say that the sequence has a limit, and that this limit is a; in symbols

                                            lim cµ = a.
                                           µ=τ

Suppose there is a well-ordered double sequence {cµν } (0 ≤ µ < τ, 0 ≤ ν < σ), which we think
of as ordered in rows and columns, and let the rows be denoted by Wµ , so that Wµ = {cµν }
(0 ≤ ν < σ). If τ is a limit number and every column has a limit

                                  lim cµν = c′ν       (0 ≤ ν < σ),
                                  µ=τ

then we say that the sequence {Wµ } has the limit W′ = {c′ν }.
   Let U and B = {vµ } (0 ≤ µ < τ ) be two irreducible systems, well-ordered in arbitrary ways;
suppose that B is algebraically dependent on U. Let vµ be an arbitrary element of B, and let

                                                  1
Ernst Steinitz                                                                   English, §§ 23–24


Bµ denote the segment of B determined by vµ . By § 22, 7, U contains a definite least subsystem
L on which vµ is algebraically dependent. The system L may well contain elements that occur
in Bµ , but it certainly also contains elements that do not occur in Bµ . If we replace the last of
these by vµ , then U is transformed into an irreducible system, equivalent to U, with the same
ordinal number. For this system, completely determined by U, B, and µ, we introduce the
notation ϑµ (U, B).
   Now let U = {uν } (0 ≤ ν < σ) and B = {vµ } (0 ≤ µ < τ ) be irreducible well-ordered
systems, and suppose that B is algebraically dependent on U. Suppose further that there is a
double sequence {cµν } (0 ≤ µ ≤ τ, 0 ≤ ν < σ), whose rows we denote by Wµ . We shall assume
the following relations:
   1) Each row Wµ = {cµν } (0 ≤ ν < σ) is an irreducible system and is equivalent to U, so that
B is algebraically dependent on every system Wµ .
   2) W0 = U, hence c0ν = uν (0 ≤ ν < σ).
   3) If 0 < µ ≤ τ and µ is not a limit number, then

                                      Wµ = ϑµ−1 (Wµ−1 , B).

   4) If 0 < µ ≤ τ and µ is a limit number, then the sequence {Wλ } (0 ≤ λ < µ) has a limit,
and this limit is Wµ .
    When these conditions are fulfilled, we say that the system sequence {Wµ } (0 ≤ µ ≤ τ ), or
also the double sequence {cµν }, belongs to the system pair U, B. The premise for this language
is therefore always that U and B are well-ordered irreducible systems and that B is algebraically
dependent on U.
   The conditions 1) through 4) determine every row by the preceding rows; and since W0 is to
be U, we first obtain:
   a) To a system pair U, B there can belong at most one system sequence. Moreover our
conditions immediately give:
    b) If the system sequence {Wµ } (0 ≤ µ ≤ τ ) belongs to the system pair U, B, and if
0 < ρ < τ , while Bρ is the segment of B determined by vρ , then the system sequence {Wµ }
(0 ≤ µ ≤ ρ) belongs to the system pair U, Bρ .
    Assume now that the system sequence {Wµ } belongs to U, B, and select a column {cµν }
(0 ≤ µ ≤ τ ) from the double sequence. If not all elements of the column are equal to the initial
element c0ν = uν , let cρν be the first one different from uν . Then ρ cannot be a limit number; for
otherwise, by 4), cρν would be the limit of {cµν } (0 ≤ µ < ρ), and so would be equal to preceding
elements of the column. Since ρ is not a limit number, by 3) Wρ = ϑρ−1 (Wρ−1 , B); and Wρ is
obtained from Wρ−1 by replacing some element of Wρ−1 by vρ−1 . Since cρν is different from
cρ−1,ν , it follows that cρν = vρ−1 . But then cµν = vρ−1 for every µ ≥ ρ. For otherwise let µ be
the least ordinal number > ρ for which cµν ̸= vρ−1 . As before, it follows that µ is not a limit
number and that Wµ is obtained from Wµ−1 by replacing cµ−1,ν = vρ−1 by cµν = vµ−1 . But by
the definition of ϑ, ϑµ−1 (Wµ−1 , B) is obtained from Wµ−1 by replacing a certain element of
Wµ−1 which does not belong to the segment of B determined by vµ−1 , by vµ−1 . The element
vρ−1 , however, does belong to this segment. Hence:
    c) If the system sequence {Wµ } (0 ≤ µ ≤ τ ), with Wµ = {cµν }, belongs to the system pair
U, B, then in a column {cµν } (0 ≤ µ ≤ τ ) either all elements are equal to uν , or there is an
ordinal number ρ, 0 < ρ ≤ τ , not a limit number, such that cµν = uν for µ < ρ, and cµν = vρ−1
for µ ≥ ρ.
     Under the same assumptions, select any element vρ−1 from B. By 3) it occurs in Wρ , say as
cρν ; and, as we have seen, when µ runs through the ordinal numbers > ρ, it cannot be replaced
by any vµ−1 . Thus vρ−1 occurs in every system Wµ whose index satisfies µ ≥ ρ. Therefore:

                                                 2
Ernst Steinitz                                                                      English, §§ 23–24


    d) If the system sequence {Wµ } (0 ≤ µ ≤ τ ) belongs to the system pair U, B = {vµ }
(0 ≤ µ < τ ), and if Bµ (0 < µ < τ ) denotes the segment determined by vµ , while B = Bτ , then
Wµ (0 < µ ≤ τ ) contains all elements of Bµ (of course not necessarily in the same order as Bµ ).
    We now assert:
   e) To every pair U, B of irreducible well-ordered systems, the second of which is algebraically
dependent on the first, there belongs a system sequence.
    As before, put U = {uν } (0 ≤ ν < σ), B = Bτ = {vµ } (0 ≤ µ < τ ), and denote by Bµ
the segment of B determined by vµ . In the case τ = 1 we plainly obtain the required system
sequence by putting W0 = U, W1 = ϑ0 (U, B). For τ > 1, e) is to be proved by induction. If τ
is not a limit number, then to begin with there belongs to the system pair U, Bτ −1 a system
sequence {Wµ } (0 ≤ µ ≤ τ − 1); and if we put ϑτ −1 (Wτ −1 , B) = Wτ , it follows at once that the
system sequence {Wµ } (0 ≤ µ ≤ τ ) satisfies all conditions 1) through 4), and hence belongs to
U, B.
    Let τ be a limit number. If 0 < λ ≤ ρ < τ , then to the pair U, Bρ there belongs one, and by
a) only one, system sequence {Wµ } (0 ≤ µ ≤ ρ); and by b) the subsequence {Wµ } (0 ≤ µ ≤ λ)
belongs to U, Bλ . Hence for each µ < τ there exists a uniquely determined system Wµ such
that the segment of the sequence {Wµ } (0 ≤ µ < τ ) extending through some Wρ inclusive is
the system sequence belonging to U, Bρ . We put Wµ = {cµν } and consider a column {cµν }
(0 ≤ µ < τ ). If not all elements are equal to uν , and if cρν is the first one different from uν , then
all elements of the column following cρν are equal to cρν ; for the assumption cρν ̸= cχν , ρ < χ, is
incompatible, by c), with the fact that the sequence {Wµ } (0 ≤ µ ≤ χ) belongs to U, Bχ . Thus
every column, and hence also the sequence {Wµ } (0 ≤ µ < τ ), has a limit. We put

                            lim Wµ = Wτ ,       Wτ = {cτ ν }    (0 ≤ ν < σ)
                            µ=τ

and assert that the system sequence {Wµ } (0 ≤ µ ≤ τ ) belongs to U, B. To prove this, we have
to show two things:
    f) Wτ is irreducible,
    g) Wτ is equivalent to W0 = U.
    If the system Wτ were reducible, it would contain a finite reducible subsystem L. Each
element of L, being the limit of its column, is equal to preceding elements of that column; and
since L contains only finitely many elements, one can choose ρ < τ so that all elements of L
already occur in Wρ . But then Wρ would be reducible, contrary to the fact that the system
sequence {Wµ } (0 ≤ µ ≤ ρ) belongs to U, Bρ . This proves f).
    An arbitrary element of B may be denoted by vρ−1 , where ρ < τ . The element vρ−1 occurs
in Wρ , say as cρν ; and then in {cµν } (0 ≤ µ < τ ), for every µ ≥ ρ, one has cµν = vρ−1 , hence
also cτ ν = limµ=τ cµν = vρ−1 . Thus Wτ contains all elements of B. Further, every element
of Wτ already occurs in some system Wρ (ρ < τ ), and Wρ is equivalent to W0 ; hence Wτ is
algebraically dependent on W0 . To prove g) it remains only to show that W0 is also algebraically
dependent on Wτ . For this purpose we give a more general proof.
    We denote by Wµν (0 ≤ µ ≤ τ, 0 < ν < σ) the segment of Wµ determined by cµν , and put
Wµ = Wµσ . We further denote by W′µν (0 ≤ µ ≤ τ, 0 < ν ≤ σ) that subsystem of Wµ which
contains all elements of Wµν , all elements of Bµ , and no other element; and put W′0ν = W0ν
(0 < ν ≤ σ). We now assert:
    h) Every system W′µν (0 ≤ µ ≤ τ, 0 < ν ≤ σ) is algebraically dependent on every system
W′ρν (µ ≤ ρ < τ ).
   This assertion includes, when we choose µ = 0, ν = σ, ρ = τ , the assertion that W0 is
algebraically dependent on Wτ . Thus h) proves g), and hence e). If h) did not hold for every
system W′µν , we would choose among the systems for which it fails one for which the second

                                                   3
Ernst Steinitz                                                                  English, §§ 23–24


index ν is as small as possible. We then choose for this W′µν the system W′ρν with least index
ρ > µ on which W′µν is not algebraically dependent. Let a be an element of W′µν which is not
algebraically dependent on W′ρν . Then a does not belong to W′ρν , hence not to Wρ , and also not
to Bρ ; consequently it belongs to Wµν . It must moreover be the last element of Wµν . Otherwise
a would belong to a segment Wµλ of Wµν , and hence also to the system W′µλ ; since this system,
by the minimal property of ν, is algebraically dependent on W′ρλ , and W′ρλ is a part of W′ρν , the
element a would be algebraically dependent on W′ρν . Thus a is the last element of Wµν ; hence ν
is not a limit number, and

                            a = cµ,ν−1 ,    Wµν = Wµ,ν−1 + cµ,ν−1 ,

and, since a does not belong to Bµ ,

                                    W′µν = W′µ,ν−1 + cµ,ν−1 ,

where in the case ν = 1 both Wµ,ν−1 and W′µ,ν−1 denote the empty system. Let λ run through
all numbers ≥ µ and < ρ. By the minimal property of ρ, W′µν is algebraically dependent on
every system W′λν ; therefore none of these systems may be algebraically dependent on W′ρν . But,
apart from cλ,ν−1 , all elements of W′λν belong to W′λ,ν−1 , and hence are algebraically dependent
on W′ρ,ν−1 , and therefore on W′ρν . Consequently cλ,ν−1 cannot be algebraically dependent on
W′ρν . Thus the elements cλ,ν−1 must be distinct from the element cρ,ν−1 contained in W′ρν . It
follows that ρ is not a limit number and

             (1)     cρ−1,ν−1 = uν−1 ,     cρ,ν−1 = vρ−1 ,      Wρ = ϑρ−1 (Wρ−1 , B)

holds. Let L denote the least subsystem of Wρ−1 on which vρ−1 is algebraically dependent.
By the definition of ϑρ−1 , Wρ is obtained from Wρ−1 by replacing the last element of L not
belonging to Bρ−1 by vρ−1 . In view of (1), this last element must be cρ−1,ν−1 = uν−1 ; that is,
every element of L belongs either to Wρ−1,ν or to Bρ−1 . If therefore L′ denotes the system into
which L is transformed by substituting vρ−1 for uν−1 , then every element of L′ belongs either
to W′ρν or to Bρ−1 ; thus L′ is part of W′ρν . On the other hand L′ is equivalent to L, and the
element a = uν−1 = cρ−1,ν−1 contained in L is therefore algebraically dependent on W′ρν . This
contradicts the preceding conclusion. Hence the assertion h) is true for all systems W′µν , and e)
is proved.
   For our purpose the only point of interest is that the system B, as part of Wτ , is mapped
one-to-one onto a part of U in the similar relation existing between U = W0 and Wτ . If the
systems U and B are equivalent, then in the same way there is a one-to-one mapping of U
onto a part of B. By a known theorem of Bernstein it follows that there is also a one-to-one
correspondence between U and B, and hence:
   3. Equivalent irreducible systems have the same cardinal number.
    When a transcendental extension Ω of a field K is decomposed, by inserting a field K(S), into
a purely transcendental extension followed by an algebraic one, all possible such decompositions
are obtained from this one by replacing the irreducible system S by all possible equivalent
irreducible systems. The cardinal number of S is therefore completely determined by K and
Ω. We call it the transcendence degree of the extension, or the transcendence degree of Ω with
respect to K. We assign transcendence degree 0 to algebraic extensions.
    Let Ω be a field between K and M, let S be a system of elements of Ω irreducible with
respect to K, and let T be a system of elements of M irreducible with respect to Ω. Suppose Ω
is algebraic with respect to K(S), and M algebraic with respect to Ω(T), so that the cardinal
numbers s and t of S and T are the transcendence degrees of Ω with respect to K, and of M
with respect to Ω. Then, with respect to K(S + T), all elements of Ω and all elements of T are
algebraic. But by adjoining all these elements to K(S + T) one obtains the field Ω(T), which

                                                4
Ernst Steinitz                                                                                    English, §§ 23–24


is therefore algebraic with respect to K(S + T). Since likewise M is algebraic with respect to
Ω(T), M is an algebraic extension of K(S + T).
     Consider an arbitrary finite subsystem of S + T, and write it in the form S′ + T′ , where S′ is
part of S and T′ part of T. The system S′ is irreducible with respect to K, and T′ is irreducible
with respect to Ω, hence also with respect to K(S′ ). If therefore S′ consists of the elements
x1 , . . . , xm , and T′ of the elements y1 , . . . , yn , then of the elements x1 , . . . , xm , y1 , . . . , yn , each
is transcendental over the field obtained by adjoining the preceding ones to K. Thus, with
respect to K, none of these elements is algebraically dependent on the system of the remaining
ones. Hence the system S′ + T′ is irreducible with respect to K; since it was an arbitrary finite
subsystem of S + T, the system S + T itself is irreducible with respect to K (§ 22, 4). The
cardinal number of S + T is denoted by s + t, so that the following theorem holds:
    4. An extension composed of two successive extensions of transcendence degrees s and t has
transcendence degree s + t.
    It is immediate that this remains valid when s or t is 0.
    By the absolute transcendence degree of a field K we mean its transcendence degree over
the prime field; and we collect in a class Kc,t all fields (or field types) which have the same
characteristic c and the same absolute transcendence degree t. Here c may be 0 or any prime
number, and t may be 0, a natural number, or any transfinite cardinal number. In each class
Kc,t there are two notable types. Namely, if one takes a prime field Pc and forms a purely
transcendental extension of transcendence degree t, one reaches a well-determined type (§ 22, 5),
which belongs to the class Kc,t and will be denoted by Rc,t . To this type there further belongs, by
§ 21, 9, a definite algebraically closed type; call it Ac,t . It arises from Rc,t by algebraic extension,
and therefore also belongs to the class Kc,t .
   5. If a field R′c,t of type Rc,t is algebraically extended to an algebraically closed field A′c,t ,
then all fields between R′c,t and A′c,t belong to the class Kc,t . Moreover every type of the class
Kc,t is represented by at least one field between R′c,t and A′c,t .
    That all fields between R′c,t and A′c,t belong to the class Kc,t follows from the fact that they
are algebraic with respect to R′c,t , and that R′c,t belongs to this class. Next it follows from our
hypotheses that A′c,t is of type Ac,t . Let now K be any field of the class Kc,t , and let Pc be
the prime field contained in K. We may choose from K a system S, irreducible with respect
to Pc , such that K is algebraic with respect to Rc,t = Pc (S). If we algebraically extend K to
an algebraically closed field Ac,t , then this field is also algebraic with respect to Rc,t . The fact
that K belongs to Kc,t implies that S has cardinal number t, that Rc,t is of type Rc,t , and that
Ac,t is of type Ac,t . It follows further (compare the proof of § 21, 9) that Ac,t can be mapped
isomorphically onto A′c,t in such a way that Rc,t passes into R′c,t . Under this mapping K is
placed in isomorphic correspondence with a field between R′c,t and A′c,t ; hence the type of K is
represented among these fields. If K itself is algebraically closed, then K = Ac,t is of type Ac,t .
Therefore:
    6. The type Ac,t is the only algebraically closed type in the class Kc,t .


§ 24. Additional Remarks of Various Kinds.
The Cardinal Number (Power, Number of Elements) of a Field. – From the well-
ordering theorem it follows easily that cardinal numbers also form a well-ordered sequence; that
the sum and the product of two cardinal numbers, at least one of which is transfinite, is equal to
the larger one; and that the system of all finite subsets of an infinite set M has the same power as
M . From this one further concludes that the number of integral functions in one indeterminate
x over an infinite field is no greater than the number of elements of the field, and that the same
is true for the roots of these functions. Algebraic extension of an infinite field therefore does

                                                           5
Ernst Steinitz                                                                     English, §§ 23–24


not increase its power. Another simple consequence of the cited theorems is that, in the case
t ≥ ℵ0 (where ℵ0 denotes the least transfinite cardinal number, the power of the countable sets),
the field Rc,t , and hence every field of the class Kc,t , has cardinal number t; while in the case of
finite t, a field of the class Kc,t , if it is not finite (which can occur only for c = p, t = 0), has
ℵ0 elements. Thus for a field whose elements are not countable, the cardinal number agrees
with the absolute transcendence degree. Since the continuum is not countable, it follows (§ 23,
6) that all algebraically closed fields of the power of the continuum and of characteristic 0 are
isomorphic. Among these fields are: the field of complex numbers, the field of all algebraic
functions of one or more variables, and others.
   Lüroth’s Theorem. – Beside Theorem II of § 14 stands the following:
   If K(x) is a simple transcendental extension of K, then every field between K and K(x) is also
simple with respect to K.
   We can also formulate this theorem as follows: if Ω is a purely transcendental extension of
K of transcendence degree 1, then every field between K and Ω is likewise a purely transcen-
dental extension of K. The natural question whether the same theorem holds for every purely
transcendental extension has not yet been settled.
   To arrive at a proof of Lüroth’s theorem, introduce beside x a new indeterminate t, and
consider the integral functions of t with coefficients in K(x). To every such function g(t) there
belongs a function obtained from it by multiplication by a factor from K(x), primitive with
respect to x,
                           g(t) = φ0 (x)tn + φ1 (x)tn−1 + · · · + φn (x),
which is distinguished by the fact that its coefficients are integral functions of x not all having
a common divisor. This function is determined up to a factor from K; if one wants it to be
completely determined, one may further require that in φ0 (x) the coefficient of the highest power
shall be ε. It is shown in the usual way that the product of two primitive functions is again
primitive; from this it follows immediately that from an equation of the form f (t) = g(t)h(t),
where f (t), g(t), h(t) are integral functions of t with coefficients in K(x), one again obtains a
correct equation by replacing these functions by the associated primitive ones.
   Let φ(t)/ψ(t) be a rational function of t, with coefficients in K, in reduced form; let m be its
degree (> 0), and let y be an element transcendental with respect to K(t). Then the function

                                            φ(t) − yψ(t)

has degree m in t; it is primitive in y, and, as we shall show at once, irreducible in the field K(y).
For if there were a decomposition

                                      φ(t) − yψ(t) = g(t)h(t),

then, on passing to the functions primitive in y, the left hand side would not change; hence we
may assume at once that g(t) and h(t) are primitive. One of these functions, say g(t), would
then have to be free of y, and the other of first degree in y. Ordering by powers of y, one sees
that g(t) would have to divide both φ(t) and ψ(t), whereas φ(t) and ψ(t) were assumed relatively
prime. Put
                                                 φ(x)
                                           y=         .
                                                 ψ(x)
Then K(y) is a field between K and K(x), and x is a root of φ(t) − yψ(t), which has degree m
and is irreducible over K(y). Hence [K(x) : K(y)] = m, i.e. the degree of K(x) with respect to
K(y) is equal to the degree of y as a rational function of x.
   We now show that the function

                            ψ(x)(φ(t) − yψ(t)) = φ(t)ψ(x) − ψ(t)φ(x)

                                                  6
Ernst Steinitz                                                                            English, §§ 23–24


is primitive in x as an integral function of t. For this purpose put

                       φ(x) = a0 + a1 x + · · · ,          ψ(x) = b0 + b1 x + · · · ,

so that
            φ(t)ψ(x) − ψ(t)φ(x) = (a0 ψ(x) − b0 φ(x)) + (a1 ψ(x) − b1 φ(x))t + · · · .
If all coefficients γi = ai ψ(x) − bi φ(x) had a common factor χ(x), then this factor would also
divide all expressions

             γi bk − γk bi = (ai bk − ak bi )ψ(x),        γi ak − γk ai = (ai bk − ak bi )φ(x),

and hence, since (as m > 0) we can choose i and k so that ai bk − ak bi ̸= 0, it would also divide
φ(x) and ψ(x), contradicting the assumption that φ(x) and ψ(x) are relatively prime. Therefore,
if φ(t)ψ(x) − ψ(t)φ(x) decomposes in the integral domain K[t, x] into two factors, neither of
them can be a function of x alone. In precisely the same way one shows that neither of the two
factors can be a function of t alone.
   Let now M be an arbitrary field, distinct from K, between K and K(x). Then K(x) is finite
over M; for if y is an element of M not contained in K, then, as we saw, K(x) is finite over K(y),
and M lies between K(y) and K(x). Let

                                       (1)      [K(x) : M] = n.

Then x is a root of an irreducible function of degree n over M,

                                   g(t) = tn + u1 tn−1 + · · · + un ,

whose coefficients, since x is transcendental with respect to K, cannot all occur in K. Let
                                                     φ(x)
                                               y=
                                                     ψ(x)
in reduced form be one of the coefficients of g(t) which does not occur in K, and let m be its
degree in x. Then M lies between K(y) and K(x), and we obtain [K(x) : K(y)] = m, hence, by
(1),
                                                   m
                              (2)    [M : K(y)] = ,       m ≥ n.
                                                   n
To g(t) there belongs a function primitive in x,

                            g(t) = φ0 (x)tn + φ1 (x)tn−1 + · · · + φn (x),

where
                                   φk (x)
                                          = uk           (k = 1, . . . , n).
                                   φ0 (x)
Since among the functions uk there also occurs y, g(t) has degree at least m in x. Now x is
a root of the function φ(t) − yψ(t) belonging to the field M; this function must therefore be
divisible by the function g(t) irreducible over M. Thus we get
                                             φ(x)
                                    φ(t) −        ψ(t) = g(t)h(t),
                                             ψ(x)
and, on passing to the associated functions primitive in x,

                             (3)      φ(t)ψ(x) − ψ(t)φ(x) = g(t) h(t).

The left hand side of (3) has degree m in x; g(t), as we saw, has degree at least m in x. It
follows from (3) that g(t) has exactly degree m in x, and that h(t) is free of x. Since it was

                                                     7
Ernst Steinitz                                                                    English, §§ 23–24


further shown that φ(t)ψ(x) − ψ(t)φ(x) cannot have a factor that is a function of t alone, h(t)
cannot contain t either. Comparing degrees in t on both sides of (3), we obtain

                                                     m = n,

and from (2)
                                                   M = K(y).
This proves Lüroth’s theorem.
    This “rational” proof of the theorem has the advantage that it holds without any restriction
for all fields K, whereas the usual form of the proof contains the assumptions that the field K is
perfect and has infinitely many elements. In the case of an imperfect field that form of proof
requires cumbersome modifications; for finite fields it fails altogether.
    The Algebraically Closed Extensions. – Proving the existence of an algebraically closed
extension belonging to a given field K still gives no method for actually constructing such an
extension. Even for arranging the elements of a field K into a well-ordered system, to which
that proof refers, there is naturally no general method. The construction of an algebraically
closed extension is, however, by no means tied to an already carried-out well-ordering of K. Two
examples follow. In both, the ground field has the power of the continuum, of which, as is
known, it has not even been established whether it is equal to ℵ1 , the second transfinite cardinal
number. Of this power are, among others, the field of real or complex numbers, the field of
rational functions of one variable z with complex coefficients, and also the field K(p) of the
so-called p-adic numbers introduced by K. Hensel.1
    In the case K = K(p), one reaches the goal on the basis of various investigations which Hensel
carried out in the cited work and in a paper recently appearing in this journal.2 The essential
point is the proof that every integral function f (x) over K(p) splits completely in a field obtained
from K(p) by adjoining a root of a function g(x) which is irreducible over K(p) and whose
coefficients are ordinary integers. Thus it is proved that the system of all integral functions
over K(p) is equivalent to the system S of integral functions with integral coefficients. While
the first-mentioned system has the power of the continuum, the system S is countable and may
therefore be arranged in a simple sequence. Once one has decided on some order and denotes
the functions so ordered by fn (x), where n runs through the natural numbers, Hensel’s methods
allow one, by a finite procedure, to compute the first function from S which is equivalent to the
system
                                       f1 (x), f2 (x), . . . , fn (x),
irreducible over K(p), and moreover normal. If this function is denoted by φn (x), one has a
system of normal functions
                                     φ1 (x), φ2 (x), . . . ,
in which each segment is subordinated to the following function. Introducing a system of symbols
jn , with the stipulation that jn is to be a root of φn (x), one obtains a system of extensions of
the field K = K(p):
                                         (4)    K1 , K2 , . . . .
Let rn denote the degree of φn (x). Then every element of Kn can be represented in the form
g(jn ), where g(x) is an integral function over K(p) of degree less than rn . Among the elements
of Kn , rn−1 are roots of φn−1 (x). If we want every field of the sequence (4) to be part of the
following one, so that, as in the case treated in § 16, these fields together constitute the desired
algebraically closed field, we must still make a stipulation by which it is decided which of the
roots of φn−1 (x) contained in Kn is to be equal to jn−1 . Now it has indeed not yet been possible
  1
      Theorie der algebraischen Zahlen I (Leipzig and Berlin 1908).
  2
      Vol. 136 (1909), p. 183.


                                                        8
Ernst Steinitz                                                                       English, §§ 23–24


to represent K(p), or any system of the power of the continuum, as a well-ordered system; but
K(p) can very easily be represented as an ordered system.3 On the basis of such an order of
K(p), one obtains an order of the integral functions over K(p) by stipulating that the function
g(x) = a0 + a1 x + · · · shall precede the function h(x) = b0 + b1 x + · · · when, in the case ak = bk
(k < n), an ̸= bn , the element an is earlier than bn . One can then require that, if g(x) is the first
function over K(p) which, for x = jn , goes over into a root of φn−1 (x), then g(jn ) = jn−1 . This
solves the problem.
    As a second case consider the field K = C(z), obtained from the field C of complex numbers
by adjoining a transcendental element z (the field of rational functions in one variable). Here
the system of all integral functions of one indeterminate x over K is no longer equivalent to a
countable system; yet the construction of an algebraically closed extension of K (without the
principle of choice) is easily achieved using the means of analysis. Namely, let A be the system
of all series, convergent for sufficiently small values of r, of the form
                                       +∞
                                                                 k         k
                                       X                                    
                                                    k/n
                                             ak r             cos φ + i sin φ ,
                                       k=q
                                                                 n         n

where r is a positive variable, φ a real variable, n an arbitrary natural number, q an arbitrary
integer, rk/n is always to be taken positive, and the coefficients ak , whose index k runs through
all integers from q upward, are arbitrary complex numbers. Each such series represents, in its
region of convergence, a single-valued function of r and φ. Two series are regarded as the same
element of A if, for all pairs of values r, φ in their common region of convergence, they converge
to the same value. To two elements α, β of A there belong, as is shown in the usual way, two
further elements γ, δ, such that within the common convergence region the relations between
α, β, γ, δ, regarded as functions of r and φ, are
                                       (5)           α + β = γ,         αβ = δ.
If we let equations (5) serve as composition equations for A, then A becomes a system with
double composition, which is easily seen to be an algebraically closed field. To each element
R(z) of K = C(z) there corresponds in A an element α such that, for sufficiently small values of
r, R(r(cos φ + i sin φ)) becomes equal to α. The field K is thus mapped isomorphically onto a
subfield K′ of A; and since A is algebraically closed, the elements of A algebraic with respect to
K′ form a field A′ , which is algebraically closed and algebraic with respect to K′ .
    Isomorphic Mapping of a Field onto a Subfield. – Let Ω be an algebraic extension of
the field K, let Ω′ be a field between K and Ω and different from Ω, let α be an element of Ω not
contained in Ω′ , and let φ(x) be the irreducible function over K with root α. Then the number
of irreducible factors of φ(x) in the field Ω is greater than in the field Ω′ ; hence Ω and Ω′ are not
equivalent extensions. If K is a prime field, then Ω and Ω′ cannot be isomorphic, because in an
isomorphic relation between Ω and Ω′ every element of the prime field would remain unchanged,
and Ω and Ω′ would therefore be equivalent extensions of K. Thus:
       1. An absolutely algebraic field is not isomorphic to any proper part of itself.
       Since every subfield of an absolutely algebraic field is again absolutely algebraic, we have:
   2. Two subfields of an absolutely algebraic field, one of which is a proper part of the other,
cannot be isomorphic.
    The property described in 2 is characteristic of absolutely algebraic fields. For if the field
K is not absolutely algebraic and x is transcendental with respect to its prime field P, then
P(x2 ) is a proper part of P(x), but the two fields are isomorphic. In contrast, 1 expresses no
characteristic property of absolutely algebraic fields; for one sees very easily, for example, that a
field of type Ac,t , where t is finite, cannot be isomorphic to any proper part of itself.
   3
       Hensel, Neue Grundlagen der Arithmetik. This journal, Vol. 127, pp. 52, 53.


                                                                9
Ernst Steinitz                                                                     English, §§ 23–24


    Among the fields that are isomorphic to a proper part of themselves, we have to distinguish
two kinds. A representative of the first kind is the field Rc,1 . It possesses infinitely many
subfields, but, except for the prime field, all are of type Rc,1 by Lüroth’s theorem. A field lying
between a field Rc,1 and an isomorphic subfield is therefore always again isomorphic to Rc,1 . Of
another kind is the field Ac,t for infinite t. By adjoining one transcendental element x, from Ac,t
one obtains a field Ac,t (x) which again has transcendence degree t, but is plainly not algebraically
closed, and so is not of type Ac,t . If, however, we algebraically extend Ac,t (x) to an algebraically
closed field, this field is again of type Ac,t . Here, therefore, between two isomorphic fields lies a
non-isomorphic one. Whenever such a case occurs, we have two fields Ω1 , Ω2 of different types,
each of which is isomorphic to a part of the other. The subfields of Ω1 therefore represent the
same types as the subfields of Ω2 .


Contents.
 Introduction                                                                      167
 I. Foundations
    § 1. Systems with double composition. Isomorphism. Fields                      172
    § 2. Subfields, extension, adjunction                                          174
    § 3. Integral domains                                                          177
    § 4. Prime fields. Characteristic                                              179
    § 5. Equivalent extensions. Simple extensions. Transcendental and              182
 algebraic elements. Adjunction of a transcendental element. Integral and
 rational functions
    § 6. Adjunction of an algebraic element                                        192
 II. Algebraic extensions
    § 7. Foundations of algebraic extensions                                       198
    § 8. Decomposition of an arbitrary integral function into linear factors.      204
 Normal fields and normal functions
    § 9. Differentiation                                                           209
    § 10. Multiplicity of the roots of an integral function                        212
    § 11. Perfect and imperfect fields                                             218
    § 12. Imperfect fields: smallest containing and largest contained perfect      224
 field. – Root fields
    § 13. Imperfect fields: algebraic extensions of the first kind                 231
    § 14. Imperfect fields: arbitrary algebraic extensions, theorem of primitive   237
 elements and theorem of intermediate fields
    § 15. Finite fields                                                            245
 III. Infinite algebraic extensions
    § 16. The absolutely algebraic fields of prime characteristic                  249
    § 17. Algebraically closed fields                                              260
    § 18. Relations between systems of integral functions and extension fields     262
    § 19. Auxiliary considerations from set theory                                 267
    § 20. The next applications                                                    271
    § 21. The fundamental theorem of algebraic extensions                          279
 IV. Transcendental extensions
    § 22. Transcendental extensions. Algebraic dependence among elements           288
 of an extension field
    § 23. Transcendence degree and the division of fields into classes             292
    § 24. Additional remarks of various kinds                                      301




                                                 10
