   Robert of Chester and Louis Karpinski, Latin translation of
                      al-Khwarizmi (1915)
                                         English Translation

                Modern LaTeX Editions of Public-Domain Mathematics Manuscripts




About this reader
   Reader type - English Translation.
   The visible PDF is the front-facing translation reader; source TeX and support material are in the
    ZIP artifacts.




                                                 1
1                Al-Khwarizmi’s Algebra — Bilingual Edition


    oemtitleo>

1
    columnrule
Latin Text & English Translation   2
             UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN STUDIES
                  Humanistic Series, Volume XI
               Contributions to the History of Science




          Robert of Chester’s
            Latin Translation
             of the
   Algebra of Al-Khowarizmi


                   BILINGUAL EDITION
      Latin Text & English Translation in Parallel Columns


                          LEFT COLUMN:
Robert of Chester’s 12th-century Latin translation (Segovia, 1145)

                         RIGHT COLUMN:
      English translation by Louis Charles Karpinski (1915)



         Edited with an Introduction, Critical Notes
                    and an English Version


                                 By
                 Louis Charles Karpinski
                      University of Michigan
Latin Text & English Translation                                      ii


                                         New York
                                   THE MACMILLAN COMPANY
                            London : Macmillan and Company, Limited

                                             1915
Preface


F
       ROM the point of view of the history of science, no justification is needed for the publication
        of a mathematical text of the twelfth century, for the available material representing this
        period is meagre. A wider acquaintance with Robert of Chester’s Latin translation of Al-
Khowarizmi’s Arabic treatise on algebra will perhaps contribute to a more just estimate of the
services rendered to science by the Arabs.
    In the English version I have not attempted to give a literal translation of the Latin, but rather
to express the thought in a phraseology which the modern student of mathematics will find easy
of comprehension; by consulting the Latin text and footnotes the reader will be able to examine
Robert of Chester’s own words. For the convenience of readers interested in the text I have
added a Latin Glossary in which are noted many variations from the usage of classical writers.
    In the Introduction I have presented a study of the significance of the treatise in the history
of mathematics, and a description of the manuscripts upon which the text is based.
    It is a pleasure to express indebtedness to Professor David Eugene Smith for having sug-
gested the work; to Mr. George A. Plimpton for the generous use of his unique mathematical
library; to the librarians of the libraries of Vienna and Dresden for photographic reproductions
of manuscripts containing this text; to the librarian of Columbia University for the loan of the
Scheybl manuscript, and to the librarian of the Cleveland Public Library for the use of works
from the John G. White collection. I am much indebted also to colleagues of the University of
Michigan, particularly in the Department of Latin and the Department of Mathematics.
    I am under special obligation to Mr. William H. Murphy for making possible this publication.

                                                                                       Louis C. Karpinski.
                                                                                     Ann Arbor, Michigan,
                                                                                       November 1, 1915.




Contents

Preface                                                                                                     iii


I Introduction                                                                                               1

1 Algebraic Analysis before Al-Khowarizmi                                                                    3
  1.1 Early Equations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    3
  1.2 Greek Contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    3

                                                     iii
Latin Text & English Translation                                                                             iv


   1.3 The Work of Diophantus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       3
   1.4 Hindu Algebra . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    4

2 Al-Khowarizmi and his Treatise on Algebra                                                                   5
  2.1 The Life of Al-Khowarizmi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       5
  2.2 Robert of Chester and Other Translators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           5

3 The Arabic Text and the Translations                                                                        7

4 Preface and Additions Found in the Arabic Text                                                              9
  The Author’s Preface (Arabic) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     9

5 Manuscripts of Robert of Chester’s Translation                                                             11
  5.1 The Extant Manuscripts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       11
  5.2 The Vienna Manuscript (V) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        11
  5.3 The Dresden Manuscript (D) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       11
  5.4 The Columbia University Manuscript (C) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           11


Abbreviations                                                                                                15


II LIBER ALGEBRAE ET ALMUCABOLA                                                                              17


Rules Corresponding to the Six Chapters of Algebra                                                           25

Some Additions in Explanation of the Algebra                                                                 27


Latin Glossary                                                                                               31
   Part I

Introduction




     1
Chapter 1

Algebraic Analysis before Al-Khowarizmi

Arabic contributions to science have, in the past, been somewhat neglected by historians. More
recent studies are recognizing our indebtedness to Mohammedan scholars, who kept the embers
of learning aglow while Europe was in the darkness of the Middle Ages. Much of our knowledge
of Greek mathematics comes to us from Arabic sources; the early Latin versions were frequently
based upon Arabic texts rather than the Greek originals. Similarly, Hindu arithmetic and astron-
omy were transmitted to Europe by Islam. The services of the Arabs to science were not limited
to the preservation and transmission of the learning of other nations. They made independent
contributions in many fields.
    Among these achievements is the Arabic algebra of Al-Khowarizmi, which for centuries en-
joyed wide popularity in the original, and for further centuries extended its popularity through
translations and adaptations. A study of the content of this work is an excursion into mediaeval
thought. By a study of the text in a form as nearly like the original as possible, we discover the
reason for its long-continued appeal to the Occidental as well as the Oriental mind, its interest
for the Englishman, the German, and the Italian, as well as for the Arab.

1.1 Early Equations

Simple equations of the first degree in one unknown, of the type ax = d, are found in the old-
est mathematical text-book which we possess, the Ahmes papyrus of about 1700 B.C. This Egyp-
tian document presents not only first degree equations together with symbols for the unknown
quantity and for the operations of addition and subtraction, but also shows traces of a study of
simultaneous linear equations some two thousand years before the Christian Era.
    Later, but still before the golden age of Greek mathematics, the quadratic equation appears
in Egypt. The problems found involve simultaneous quadratic equations, thus:

     Another example of the distribution of a given area into squares. If you are told to
     distribute 100 square ells (units of area) over two squares so that the side of one shall
     be 43 of the side of the other: please give me each of the unknowns.

    The solution follows by assuming the side of one square to be unity, and the other 34 . The sum
of these areas is 25
                  16 , of which the root 4 is to the required side as 4 is to 1, whence one side is 8
                                         5                            5

and the other 6. The algebraical equivalent of this geometrical problem is, evidently,

                                    x2 + y 2 = 100,   x : y = 4 : 3.

1.2 Greek Contributions

Several propositions of Euclid present geometrical equivalents of the solution of various types of
quadratic equations, not involving negative coefficients, and further study of similar problems

                                                  3
Latin Text & English Translation                                                                        4


appears in Euclid’s Data. Of this nature are the fifth, sixth, and eleventh propositions of the
second book of the Elements and the twenty-seventh, twenty-eighth, and twenty-ninth of the
sixth book.
    The eleventh proposition of the second book of the Elements furnishes the solution of the
equation
                                         x2 + ax = a2
or even more general,
                                            x2 + ax = b2 .
   Analytical solution of the quadratic equation appears quite definitely in the works of Heron
of Alexandria, who flourished about the beginning of the Christian Era. Heron states in effect
that given the sum of two line segments and their product then each of the segments is known.

1.3 The Work of Diophantus

In respect to analysis Diophantus is the greatest name among the Greeks. Recently it has been
established that he flourished in the third century of the Christian Era, when Greek supremacy
in mathematics was waning. No doubt whatever exists that this Alexandrian was familiar with
the analytical solution of the various forms of quadratic equations, neglecting negative roots and,
of course, imaginary roots, which did not receive serious treatment for more than a millennium
after Diophantus.
    The three types of complete quadratic equations, involving only positive coefficients, are the
following:

                                          ax2 + bx = c,                                              (1.1)
                                              2
                                           ax + c = bx,                                              (1.2)
                                                    2
                                                  ax = bx + c.                                       (1.3)

    All three types appear in the Arithmetica of Diophantus, not systematically treated but solved
as incidental to the solution of other problems.

1.4 Hindu Algebra

Some two centuries after the period of Diophantus, Aryabhata, one of the earliest Hindu math-
ematicians of prominence, was born (476 A.D.). Brahmagupta of Ujjain, the centre of Indian
learning, wrote on algebra in the early part of the seventh century and gave a rule for the solu-
tion of quadratic equations:

     To the absolute number multiplied by the [coefficient of the] square, add the square of
     half the [coefficient of the] unknown, the square root of the sum, less half the [coefficient
     of the] unknown, being divided by the [coefficient of the] square, is the unknown.

   In formula this corresponds to the solution
                                         √
                                           (b/2)2 + ac − b/2
                                    x=
                                                  a
of the equation ax2 + bx = c.
Chapter 2

Al-Khowarizmi and his Treatise on Al-
gebra


T
      HE activity of the great Arabic mathematician Abu ’Abdallah Mohammed ibn Musa al-
       Khowarizmi marks the beginning of that period of mathematical history in which analysis
       assumed a place on a level with geometry; and his algebra gave a definite form to the ideas
which we have been setting forth.
    The arithmetic of Al-Khowarizmi made known to the Arabs and, through an early twelfth-
century translation, to Europeans also, the Hindu art of reckoning. Any consideration of the
difficulties attending arithmetical operations with the Greek letter numerals, or even with the
Roman numerals, shows how essential the adoption of numerals with place value was for the
development of the analytical side of mathematics.

2.1 The Life of Al-Khowarizmi

Our chief source of information in regard to the life and the writings of our Arabic author is the
Book of Chronicles (Kitab al-Fihrist) by Ibn Abi Ya’qub al-Nadim. This work, which was completed
about 987 A.D., gives biographies of learned men of all nations, together with lists of such of their
works as were known to Al-Nadim. We quote the passage relating to our author:

     Mohammed ibn Musa, born in Khowarizm (modern Khiva), worked in the library of the
     caliphs under Al-Mamun. During his lifetime, and afterward, where observations were
     made, people were accustomed to rely upon his tables, which were known by the name
     Sind-Hind (Hindu Siddhanta). He wrote: The book of astronomical tables in two editions,
     the first and the second; On the sun-dial; On the use of the astrolabe; On the construction
     of the astrolabe; The Book of Chronology.

   The bibliography of Al-Nadim does not include four works from the hand of Al-Khowarizmi
which have come to us. These are his arithmetic, his algebra, a work on the quadrivium, and an
adaptation of Ptolemy’s geography.
   The equation x2 +10x = 39 runs like a thread of gold through the algebras for several centuries,
appearing in the algebras of Abu Kamil, Al-Karkhi and ’Omar al-Khayyami, and frequently in the
works of Christian writers, centuries later.

2.2 Robert of Chester and Other Translators



W
          HEN towards the beginning of the twelfth century European scholars turned to Islam
           for light, the works of Mohammed ibn Musa came to occupy a prominent place in
           their studies. Contemporary with these men was Robert of Chester.

                                                 5
Latin Text & English Translation                                                              6


    The assertion was made by Curtze that the Liber embadorum, Book of Measures, in Hebrew,
by Abraham bar Chiyya Ha Nasi, known as Savasorda, was the first work to appear in Latin
showing to the Western world how the solution of quadratic equations is accomplished. It has
recently been shown by Haskins, on the basis of astronomical data in the work, that this date is
undoubtedly a scribe’s error for DXL, corresponding to 1145 A.D.
    Robert of Chester, known to fame chiefly as the first translator of the Koran, was doubtless
educated in the well-known school located at Chester. Of the more personal side of Robert’s life
we have but scattered facts. His nationality is established not only by his name and his return
to England in 1150, but also by the direct statement made by Peter the Venerable in a letter of
1143 concerning the Koran, addressed to Bernard of Clairvaux.
    To Peter the Venerable, Abbot of Cluny, who induced Robert to undertake the translation of
the Koran, the latter addressed a Saracenic chronicle. Other names have been connected with
this translation of the Koran, but a study of Peter’s letters shows that Robert and Hermann were
definitely requested to undertake the translation.
    Of Robert’s works the version of the Koran was completed in 1143. In a prefatory letter he
states that this task was regarded by him only as a digression from his principal studies of as-
tronomy and geometry.
Chapter 3

The Arabic Text and the Translations

The Arabic text of Al-Khowarizmi’s algebra, together with an English translation, was published
by Frederick Rosen in 1831. This excellent work is unfortunately out of print, and so is not
available to most students of mathematics.
   The Latin translation by Robert of Chester is not as faithful nor as correct as the text ascribed
to Gerard of Cremona, published by Libri. Omissions, transpositions, and additions to the text
are so numerous that it does not seem desirable to list them all. No evidence exists, however, that
Robert’s text is based upon another Arabic original than that of the Libri text. The text proper,
as opposed to the illustrative problems, follows the general lines of the Arabic original.




                                                 7
Latin Text & English Translation   8
Chapter 4

Preface and Additions Found in the Ara-
bic Text

The Arabic text of Al-Khowarizmi’s algebra published by Rosen contains an author’s preface
which is not found either in the translation published by Libri, or in that by Robert of Chester.
As this reveals his conception of the purpose of the algebra, as well as some of the causes which
led him to undertake the work, we present it here in the translation by Rosen.

The Author’s Preface (Arabic)

     In the Name of God, gracious and merciful!
     This work was written by Mohammed ben Musa, of Khowarezm. He commences it thus:
     Praised be God for his bounty towards those who deserve it by their virtuous acts: in
     performing which, as by him prescribed to his adoring creatures, we express our thanks,
     and render ourselves worthy of the continuance (of his mercy), and preserve ourselves
     from change: acknowledging his might, bending before his power, and revering his great-
     ness!
     That fondness for science, by which God has distinguished the Imam al Mamun, the Com-
     mander of the Faithful, that affability and condescension which he shows to the learned,
     that promptitude with which he protects and supports them in the elucidation of obscu-
     rities and in the removal of difficulties, — has encouraged me to compose a short work
     on Calculating by (the rules of) Completion and Reduction, confining it to what is easiest
     and most useful in arithmetic, such as men constantly require in cases of inheritance,
     legacies, partition, law-suits, and trade, and in all their dealings with one another, or
     where the measuring of lands, the digging of canals, geometrical computation, and other
     objects of various sorts and kinds are concerned.




                                                 9
Latin Text & English Translation   10
Chapter 5

Manuscripts of Robert of Chester’s Trans-
lation

5.1 The Extant Manuscripts

Steinschneider was the first in recent times to call attention to the translation of Al-Khowarizmi’s
algebra made by Robert of Chester. He suggested the desirability of publishing this text, refer-
ring to the manuscript in Vienna. To this same manuscript Curtze later, and independently of
Steinschneider, directed attention and also suggested the desirability of the publication of the
work. Wappler, in 1887, found a second copy of the algebra in a manuscript in Dresden, while
some time later David Eugene Smith acquired for the Columbia University Library a manuscript
from the hand of Johann Scheybl which contains a third transcription of the algebra.

5.2 The Vienna Manuscript (V)

Codex Vindobonensis 4770 (Rec. 3246) XIV. 339. 8◦ (V). Fol. 1r –12v , Liber restaurationis et oppo-
sitionis numeri; our text.

5.3 The Dresden Manuscript (D)

Codex Dresdensis C. 80. Fifteenth century. Paper. By various hands. 416 pages, numbered 1–225,
227–417. Folio, bound in parchment (D).

5.4 The Columbia University Manuscript (C)

Codex Universitatis Columbiae; Columbia University Library Manuscript, X 512, Sch. 2, Q. 308
pages. (C.) Pages 71–122, Liber Algebrae et Almucabola, continens demonstrationes aequationum
regularum Algebrae.




                                                11
Latin Text & English Translation   12
Abbreviations




      13
15                                                        Al-Khwarizmi’s Algebra — Bilingual Edition


                               C = Codex Universitatis Columbiae
                               D = Codex Dresdensis
                               R = Fragmentum Romain
                               V = Codex Vindobonensis

   After the note to line 6 of the second page of the Latin text, the notes without any letter indi-
cate the concurrence of V and D.
                             add. vel add.    addition(s) by Scheybl
                             marg.            marginal note
                             man.             manuscript
                             om.              omits
                             corr.            corrected
                             passim           throughout
                             supra versum     above the line
                             infra            below
Latin Text & English Translation   16
           Part II

LIBER ALGEBRAE ET ALMUCABOLA




             17
19                                                               Al-Khwarizmi’s Algebra — Bilingual Edition


                         The Book of Algebra and Almucabola
                        Latin Text with English Translation in Parallel Columns



                     Containing Demonstrations of the Rules of the Equations of Algebra
                         Written in Arabic by Mohammed ibn Musa Al-Khwarizmi
                       and translated into Latin by Robert of Chester in Segovia, 1145




        LIBER ALGEBRAE ET ALMUCABOLA,                       THE BOOK OF ALGEBRA AND ALMUCABOLA,
     continens demonstrationes aequationum                 Containing Demonstrations of the Rules of the
               regularum Algebrae                                      Equations of Algebra
  Ab incerto authore olim arabice conscriptus atque      Written some time ago in Arabic by an unknown author
                        deinde a                                             and afterwards,
  Roberto Cestrensi, in ciuitate Secobiensi anno 1145,   in the year 1145, put into Latin by Robert of Chester in
               latino sermoni donatus.                                      the city of Segovia.




                                                         T
LIBER ALGEBRAE ET ALMUCABOLA, de quaestion-                    HE Book of Algebra and Almucabola, con-
ibus arithmeticis et geometricis                                cerning arithmetical and geometrical prob-
                                                                lems.
      In nomine dei pii et misericordis incipit
      liber Restaurationis et Oppositionis numeri              In the name of God, tender and compas-
      quem aedidit Mahomet, filius Mosi Algaurizin.            sionate, begins the book of Restoration
                                                               and Opposition of number put forth by
                                                               Mohammed Al-Khowarizmi, the son of
                                                               Moses.

    Dixit Mahomet, Laus deo creatori, qui homini            Mohammed said, Praise God the creator who
contulit scientiam inueniendi vim numerorum. Consideranshas  bestowed upon man the power to discover the
enim omne id quo indigent homines, ex numeris           significance  of numbers. Indeed, reflecting that all
                                                        things which men need require computation, I dis-
componi, inueni illud totum esse numerum, et inueni
                                                        covered that all things involve number and I dis-
nihil aliud esse numerum, nisi quod ex vnitatibus       covered that number is nothing other than that which
componitur. Vnitas ergo in omni numero reperitur. is composed of units. Unity therefore is implied in
Inueni autem omnem numerum ita dispositum, vt           every number. Moreover I discovered all numbers
omnis numerus vnitatem excedit vsque ad decem, to be so arranged that they proceed from unity up
denarius quoque numerus ad modum vnitatis disponitur,   to ten. The number ten is treated in the same man-
vnde et duplicatur et triplicatur, quemadmodum          ner as the unit, and for this reason doubled and
                                                        tripled just as in the case of unity. Out of its dupli-
factum cum vnitate. Fiuntque ex eius duplicatione,
                                                        cation arises 20, and from its triplication 30. And
20: et triplicatione, 30. Et sic multiplicando denarium so multiplying the number ten you arrive at one-
numerum, ad centenarium peruenitur. Ita centenarius hundred. Again the number one-hundred is dou-
numerus duplicatur et triplicatur, sicut denarius       bled and tripled like the number ten. So by dou-
numerus. Et sic centenarium numerum duplicando          bling and tripling etc. the number one-hundred
et triplicando etc. millenarius excrescit numerus. grows to one-thousand. In this way multiplying the
Ad hunc modum numerum millenarium secundum              number one-thousand according to the various de-
ordinem numerorum multiplicando, vsque ad infinitam     nominations of numbers you come even to the in-
                                                        vestigation of number to infinity.
numeri inuestigationem peruenitur.
    Postea inueni numerum restaurationis et oppositionis Furthermore I discovered that the numbers of
his tribus modis esse inuentum, scilicet radicibus, restoration and opposition are composed of these
substantiis et numeris.                                 three kinds: namely, roots, squares1 and numbers.
                                                        However number alone is connected neither with
    Solus numerus tamen neque radicibus neque
Latin Text & English Translation                                                                              20


substantiis vlla proportione coniunctus est. Earum     roots nor with squares by any ratio. Of these then
igitur radix est omnis res ex vnitatibus cum se ipsa   the root is anything composed of units which can
multiplicata aut omnis numerus supra vnitatem cum be multiplied by itself, or any number greater than
se ipso multiplicatus: aut quod infra vnitatem diminutum
                                                       unity multiplied by itself: or that which is found to
cum se ipso multiplicatum reperitur. Substantia vero be diminished below unity when multiplied by it-
est omne illud quod ex multiplicatione radicis cum     self. The square is that which results from the mul-
se ipsa colligitur.                                    tiplication of a root by itself.
    Ex his igitur tribus modis semper duo sunt sibi        Of these three forms, then, two may be equal to
inuicem coaequantia, sicut diceres                     each other, as for example

          Substantiae radices coaequent                               Squares equal to roots.
        Substantiae numeros coaequent, et                          Squares equal to numbers, and
           Radices numeros coaequent.                                 Roots equal to numbers.


                 Caput Primum.
                                                          Chapter I. Concerning Squares Equal to
       De substantiis radices coaequantibus               Roots

    Substantiae quae radices coaequant sunt, si dicas, The following is an example of squares equal to
                                                       roots: a square is equal to 5 roots. The root of the
    Substantia quinque coaequatur radicibus. Radix square then is 5, and 25 forms its square which, of
igitur substantiae sunt 5, et 25 ipsam componunt       course, equals five of its roots.2
substantiam, quae videlicet suis quinque aequatur          Another example: the third part of a square equals
radicibus.                                             four roots. Then the root of the square is 12 and 144
                                                                              3
    Et etiam si dicas, Tertia pars substantiae quatuor designates its square. And similarly, five squares
aequatur radicibus: Radix igitur substantiae sunt      equal 10 roots. Therefore one square equals two
12, et 144 ipsam demonstrant substantiam.              roots and the root of the square is 2. Four repre-
                                                       sents the square.4
    Et etiam ad similitudinem, Quinque substantiarum       In the same manner then that which involves
10 radices coaequantium. Vna igitur substantia duabusmore than one square, or is less than one, is re-
radicibus aequiparatur, et radix substantiae sunt 2    duced to one square. Likewise you perform the
— et substantiam quaternarius ostendit numerus.        same operation upon the roots which accompany
    Eodem namque modo, hoc quod ex substantiis         the squares.
excreuerit, aut minus ea fuerit, ad vnam conuertitur
substantiam. Et similiter facies cum eo quod cum
ipsis ex radicibus fuerit.

                     Caput II.
                                                          Chapter II. Concerning Squares Equal
      De substantiis numeros coaequantibus                to Numbers

    Substantiae vero numeros coaequantes hoc modo Squares equal to numbers are illustrated in the fol-
proponuntur. Substantia nouenario coaequatur numero. lowing manner: a square is equal to nine. Then
Nouenarius igitur numerus mensurat substantiam       nine measures the square of which three represents
                                                               5
cuius vnam radicem ternarius ostendit numerus. one root.
Eodem modo iuxta multitudinem et paucitatem substantiarumWhether there are many or few squares they
ipsae substantiae ad vnius substantiae similitudinem will have to be reduced in the same manner to the
erunt tractandae. Hoc est, si substantiae duae vel   form  of one square. That is to say, if there are two
tres vel quatuor, siue etiam plures fuerint, earum   or three  or four squares, or even more, the equa-
cum suis radicibus coaequatio, sicut vnius cum sua   tion formed   by them with their roots is to be re-
radice, quaerenda est.                               duced  to the form of one square with its root. Fur-
                                                     ther if there be less than one square, that is if a

  1
    Literally ‘substances,’ being a translation of the Arabic word mal, used for the second power of the unknown.
Gerard of Cremona used census, which has a similar meaning.
  2 2
    x = 5x; x = 5, x2 = 25.
  31 2
    3
      x = 4x; x = 12, x2 = 144.
  4
    5x2 = 10x; x2 = 2x, x = 2, x2 = 4.
21                                                                   Al-Khwarizmi’s Algebra — Bilingual Edition


   Si vero minus vna fuerit, hoc est, si tertia vel     third or a fourth or a fifth part of a square or root
quarta vel quinta pars substantiae vel radicis propositais proposed, this is treated in the same manner.6
fuerit, eodem modo ea tractetur, vt si dicas,               For example, five squares equal 80. Therefore
                                                        one square equals the fifth part of the number 80
   Quinque substantiae 80 coaequantur. Vna igitur
                                                        which, of course, is 16.7 Or, to take another exam-
substantia quintae parti numeri 80 coaequatur, quam
                                                        ple, half of a square equals 18. This square there-
videlicet 16 componunt.
                                                        fore equals 36.8
   Et etiam si dicas. Medietas substantiae 18 coaequatur.
Haec igitur substantia 36 coaequatur.

                       Caput III.
                                                             Chapter III. Concerning Roots Equal to
           De radicibus numeros coaequantibus                Numbers

    Radices quae numeros coaequant sunt, si dicas. The following is an example of roots equal to num-
Radix ternario aequatur numero. Et etiam si dicas, bers: a root is equal   9
                                                                             to 3. Therefore nine is the
Quatuor radices vigeno coaequantur numero. Vna        square  of this root.
igitur radix substantiae huius quinario coaequatur        Another example: four roots equal 20. There-
                                                                                       10
numero. Et etiam si dicas, Media radix denario coaequatur one root of this square is 5. Still another ex-
                                                      fore
numero. Tota igitur radix vigeno aequatur numero, ample: half a root is equal to ten. The whole root
cuius videlicet substantiam 400 demonstrant.          therefore equals 20, of which, of course, 400 repre-
                                                      sents the square.11
    Radices igitur et substantiae et numeri solum,        Therefore roots and squares and pure numbers
quemadmodum diximus, distinguuntur. Vnde et ex        are, as we have shown, distinguished from one an-
his tribus modis quos iam praemisimus, tria oriuntur other. Whence also from these three kinds which
genera tripliciter distincta; vt                     we have just explained, three distinct types of equa-
                                                      tions12 are formed involving three elements, as
      Substantia et radices numeros coaequant
     Substantia et numeri radices coaequant, et            A square and roots equal to numbers,
     Radices et numeri substantiam coaequant.            A square and numbers equal to roots, and
                                                           Roots and numbers equal to a square.


                      Caput IIII.
                                                             Chapter IV. Concerning Squares and Roots
           De substantiis et radicibus numeros               Equal to Numbers
                     coaequantibus
                                                        The following is an example of squares and roots
    Substantiae vero et radices quae numeros coaequant, equal to numbers: a square and 10 roots are equal
                                                                      13
sunt, si dicas. Substantia et 10 radices 39 coaequantur to 39 units.       The question therefore in this type
drachmis. Huius igitur artis inuestigatio talis est:    of equation    is about     as follows: what is the square
die, quae est substantia, cui si similitudinem decern   which   combined       with    ten of its roots will give a
suarum radicum adiunxeris, ad 39 tota haec collectio    sum  total of  39?   The    manner    of solving this type of
protendatur. Modus hanc artem inueniendi est, vt        equation   is  to  take    one-half   of the roots just men-
radices iam pronunciatas per medium diuidas, sed        tioned.   Now     the    roots  in  the  problem    before us
radices in hac interrogatione sunt 10, accipe igitur    are 10. Therefore       take  5, which   multiplied   by itself
5, et iis cum se ipsis multiplicatis producuntur 25;    gives 25, an   amount      which   you   add to 39, giving  64.
quae omnia 39 adiicias, et veniunt 64. Huius igitur     Having   taken    then    the square    root of this which   is
radice quadrata accepta, quae est 8, ab ea medietatem   8, subtract  from    it  the half  of the roots, 5, leaving  3.
     5 2
     x = 9; x = 3, x2 = 9.
     6
     Our modern expression “to complete the square,” used in algebra, originally meant to make the coefficient of x2
equal to unity, i.e. make one whole square.
   7
     5x2 = 80; x2 = 16.
   81 2
      2
        x = 18; x2 = 36.
   9
     x = 3; x2 = 9.
  10
     4x = 20; x = 5, x2 = 25.
  11 1
      2
        x = 10; x = 20, x2 = 400.
  12
     ‘Types of equations’ = genera. Abu Kamil, Omar Al-Khayyami, Al-Karkhi, and Leonard designate these as ‘com-
posite’ types. In modern notation: ax2 + bx = n; ax2 + n = bx; ax2 = bx + n.
Latin Text & English Translation                                                                                                         22


radicum 5 subtrahas, et manebunt 3. Ternarius igitur The number three therefore represents one root of
numerus huius substantiae vnam ostendit radicem, this square, which itself, of course, is 9. Nine there-
quae videlicet substantia nouenario dinoscitur numero.    fore gives that square.14
Nouem igitur illam componunt substantiam.
    Similiter quotquot substantiae propositae fuerint,        Similarly however many squares are proposed
omnes ad vnam conuertas substantiam. Similiter            all are to be reduced to one square. Similarly also
quicquid cum eis ex numeris siue radicibus fuerit, you may reduce whatever numbers or roots accom-
id omne eo modo quo cum substantiis existi, conuertas.pany them in the same way in which you have re-
Huius autem conuersionis talis est modus, vt si dicas, duced the squares. The following is an example of
                                                          this reduction: two squares and ten roots equal 48
    Duae substantiae et 10 radices 48 drachmis coaequantur. 15
                                                          units.
Huius artis talis est inuestigatio, vt dicas, Quae sunt
duae substantiae inuicem collectae, quibus si similitudo
10 radicum earum adiuncta fuerit, ad 48 tota extendatur
collectio. Nunc autem oportet, vt duas substantias
ad vnam conuertas. Sed iam manifestum est, quoniam
vna substantia medietatem duarum designat, igitur
omnem rem in hac quaestione tibi propositam, ad
medium conuertas, dicendo
    Substantia et 5 radices 24 drachmis coaequantur.          Another possible example: half a square and
Modus huius rei talis est, vt dicas. Quae est substantia, five roots are equal to 28 units.16 The import of this
cui si quinque suas radices adiunxeris, ad 24 excrescat.problem is something like this: what is the square
Nunc etiam oportet, vt ad regulam supra datam animum      which is such that when to its half you add five of
conuertas, et diuidas radices per medium et veniunt its roots the sum total amounts to 28? Now how-
2 et vnius medietas, iis cum se ipsis multiplicatis, ever it is necessary that the square, which here is
producuntur 6 et 1/4, illis 24 adiicias, veniunt 30 et    given as less than a whole square, should be com-
vnius 1/4. Postea huius aggregati radicem quadratam pleted.17 Therefore the half of this square together
accipias, quam scilicet 5 et vnius medietas componunt, with the roots which accompany it must be dou-
ex qua medietatem radicum, 2 1/2, subtrahas et manebunt   bled. We have then, a square and 10 roots equal to
3, quae vnam radicem substantiae exprimunt, quam 56 units. Therefore take one-half of the roots, giv-
substantiam nouenarius componit numerus.                  ing 5, which multiplied by itself produces 25. Add
                                                          this to 56, making 81. Extract the square root of this
                                                          total, which gives 9, and from this subtract half of
                                                          the roots, 5, leaving 4 as the root of the square.
    Et si diceretur, Medietas substantiae et quinque
radices 28 coaequantur drachmis. Huius questionis
talis est modus, vt dicas. Quae est substantia, cuius
medietati si quinque suas radices adiunxeris, tota
summa ad 28 excrescat, ita tamen vt substantia quae
prius diminuta fuerat, perfecta compleatur. Igitur
huius substantiae medietas cum radicibus secum
pronunciatis, duplicanda est; veniunt autem, substantia
et 10 radices 56 drachmis aequales.
     Diuide igitur radices per medium, et veniunt 5,
quibus cum seipsis multiplicatis, producuntur 25;
illa adde 56, et colliguntur 81; huius collecti radicem
quadratam accipias, quam nouenarius componit numerus,
atque ex ea medietatem radicum 5 subtrahas et manebunt
4, substantiae radix.
  13 2
                                                              √
       x + 10x = 39; 12 of 10 is 5, 52 = 25, 25 + 39 = 64,        64 = 8;√8 − 5 = 3. x2 = 9.
  14
   For the general type x2 + bx = n, the solution is x =       ( 2b )2 + n − 2b ; the negative value of the square root is
neglected, as that would give a negative root of the equation.                           √
  15
    2x2 + 10x = 48, reducing to x2 + 5x = 24; 12 of 5 is 2 12 , (2 21 )2 = 6 14 , 24 + 6 14 = 30 41 , 30 14 = 5 12 ; 5 21 − 2 12 = 3, x2 = 9.
  16 1 2
                                                    √
     2
       x + 5x = 28, reducing to x2 + 10x = 56; x = 25 + 56 − 5, or x = 4. Note that the value of x2 is not given here as
it usually is.
   17
      Attention is called to the force of the expression, “completing the square,” as here used with the meaning to make
the coefficient of the second power of the unknown quantity equal to unity or making one whole square.
23                                                                            Al-Khwarizmi’s Algebra — Bilingual Edition


                          Caput V.                                  Chapter V. Concerning Squares and Num-
 De substantiis et numeris radices coaequantibus                    bers Equal to Roots
                                                         The following is an illustration of this type: a square
    Propositio huius rei talis est, vt dicas, Substantia and 21 units equal 10 roots.18
et 21 drachmae 10 radicibus coaequantur.
    Ad hoc inuestigandum talis datur regula, vt dicas.        The rule for the investigation of this type of equa-
Quae est substantia, cui si 21 drachmas adiunxeris, tion is as follows: what is the square which is such
tota summa simul decern ipsius substantiae radices that when you add 21 units the sum total equals 10
exhibeat. Huius quaestionis solutio hoc modo concipitur, roots of that square? The solution of this type of
vt radices primum per medium diuidas, et veniunt         problem is obtained in the following manner. You
in hoc casu 5, haec cum seipsis multiplicata, producunturtake first one-half of the roots, giving in this instance
25. Ex illis 21 drachmas, quas paulo ante cum substantiis5, which multiplied by itself gives 25. From 25 sub-
commemorauimus, subtrahas, et manebunt 4, horum tract the 21 units to which we have just referred in
radicem quadratam accipias, vt sunt 2, quae ex medietate connection with the squares. This gives 4, of which
radicum 5 diminuas, et manebunt 3, vnam radicem          you extract the square root, which is 2. From the
huius substantiae constituentia, quam scilicet substantiam
                                                         half of the roots, or 5, you take 2 away, and 3 re-
nouenarius complet numerus.                              mains, constituting one root of this square which
                                                         itself is, of course, 9.19
    Quod si libuerit, poteris ipsa 2, quae a medietate        If you wish you may add to the half of the roots,
radicum iam diminuisti, medietati radicum 5 scilicet namely 5, the same 2 which you have just subtracted
addere, et veniunt 7; quae vnam substantiae radicem from the half of the roots. This give 7, which stands
demonstrant quam substantiam 49 adimplent. Cum for one root of the square, and 49 completes the
igitur aliquod huius capitis exemplum tibi propositum square.20 Therefore when any problem of this type
fuerit, ipsius modum cum adiectione, quemadmodum is proposed to you, try the solution of it by addition
dictum est, inuestiga, quern si cum adiectione non       as we have said. If you do not solve it by addition,
inueneris, procul dubio cum diminutione reperies. without doubt you will find it by subtraction. And
Hoc enim caput solum adiectione simul et diminutione indeed this type alone requires both addition and
indiget quod in aliis capitibus praemissis minime        subtraction, and this you do not find at all in the
reperies.                                                preceding types.
    Sciendum est etiam, quando radices iuxta hoc              You ought to understand also that when you take
caput mediaueris, et medietatem deinde cum seipsa the half of the roots in this form of equation and
multiplicaueris, si quod ex multiplicatione tollitur     then multiply the half by itself, if that which pro-
vel procreatur, minus fuerit drachmis cum substantia ceeds or results from the multiplication is less than
pronunciatis: quaestio tibi proposita nulla erit. At     the units above-mentioned as accompanying the square,
si drachmis aequale fuerit vna radix fientque 25.        you have no equation.21 If equal to the units, it fol-
                                                         lows that a root of the square will be the same as
                                                         the half of the roots which accompany the square,
                                                         without either addition or diminution.22 Whenever
                                                         a problem is proposed that involves two squares,
                                                         or more or less than a single square, reduce to one
                                                         square just as we have indicated in the first chap-
                                                         ter.
                         Caput VI.
          De radicibus et numeris substantiam
                     coaequantibus

    In hoc capite sic proponitur, Tres radices et quatuor
ex numeris coaequantur substantiae.
  18 2
       x + 21 = 10x.                                                √
  19
       For the general type, x2 + n = bx the solution is x = 2b ±       ( 2b )2 − n, and both positive and negative values of the
radical give positive solutions of the equation proposed. In this problem we have x2 + 21 = 10x; 21 of 10 is 5, 52 = 25,
             √
25 − 21 = 4, 4 = 2; 5 − 2 = 3, one root; 5 + 2 = 7, the other root.
  20
     Another use of the expression, “completing the square.”
  21
     This corresponds to the condition, b2 − 4ac < 0, in the equation ax2 + bx + c = 0; in this event the roots are
imaginary.
  22
     Condition for equal roots, b2 − 4ac = 0.
Latin Text & English Translation                                                                                                                   24


                                                                                       Chapter VI. Concerning Roots and Num-
                                                                                       bers Equal to a Square
                                                         An example of this type is proposed as follows: three
                                                         roots and the number four are equal to a square.23
    Ad hoc inuestigandum talis datur regula, quod            The rule for the investigation of this kind of prob-
scilicet radices per medium diuidas et venit vnum        lem is, you see, that you take half of the roots, giv-
et alterius medietas, hoc deinde cum seipsis multiplices,ing one and one-half; this you multiply by itself,
et producuntur 2 1/4, his 4 ex numeris adiicias, et      producing 2 14 . To 2 14 add 4, giving 6 14 , of which you
veniunt 6 1/4, huius postea radicem quadratam accipias,  then take the square root, that is, 2 21 . To 2 21 you now
hoc est 2 1/2. Atque earn tandem medietati radicum, add the half of the roots, or 1 12 , giving 4, which indi-
vni scilicet et dimidio, adiicias, et veniunt 4, quae    cates one root of the square. Then 16 completes the
vnam substantiae radicem componunt, quam deinde square.24 Now also whatever is proposed to you
substantiam numerus 16 adimplet.                         either more or less than a square, reduce to one
                                                         square.
    Quicquid igitur plus siue minus substantia tibi          Now of the types of equations which we men-
propositum fuerit, ad vnam conuertas substantiam. tioned in the beginning of this book, the first three
Ex his igitur modis, de quibus in principio libri mentionem
                                                         are such that the roots are not halved, while in the
fecimus, sunt tres priores, in quibus radices non        following or remaining three, the roots are halved,
mediantur, in tribus vero posterioribus vel residuis     as appears above.
mediantur radices prout superius liquet.



            Demonstrationes Geometricae                                                            Geometrical Demonstrations
                  Geometrical Demonstrations

     Dixit Algaurizin. Sex sunt modi de quibus, quantum We have said enough, says Al-Khowarizmi,
ad numeros pertinet, sufficienter diximus. Nunc vero so far as numbers are concerned, about the six types
oportet, vt quod per numeros proposuimus, ex geometrica   of equations. Now, however, it is necessary that we
idem verum esse demonstremus.                             should demonstrate geometrically the truth of the
                                                          same problems which we have explained in num-
                                                          bers.
     Nostra igitur prima propositio talis est, Substantia        Therefore our first proposition is this, that a square
et 10 radices 39 coaequantur drachmis. Huius probatio and 10 roots equal 39 units. The proof is that we
est, vt quadratum cuius latera ignorantur, proponamus.construct a square of unknown sides, and let this
Hoc autem quadratum quod loco substantiae ponimus,square figure represent the square (second power
et eius radicem scire volumus atque designare. Sit        of the unknown) which together with its root you
igitur quadratum a b cuius vnumquodque latus vnam wish to find. Let the square, then, be ab, of which
ostendit radicem. Iam manifestum est, quoniam, quando     any side represents one root. Now it is evident that
aliquod eius latus cum numero numerorum multiplicauerimus,when one side of it we multiply by any number,
tunc hoc quod ex multiplicatione colligitur erit numerus  then the amount of that multiplication equals the
radicum radici ipsius numeri aequalis.                    number of roots which is equal to the root of that
                                                          same number.
     Quoniam ergo decern radices cum substantia                  Since then ten roots are proposed with the square,
pronunciantur, quartam igitur partem numeri decem we take the fourth part of the number ten, that is
accipimus, atque vnicuique lateri quadrati aream          2 12 , and to each of the four sides of the square we
aequedistantium laterum applicamus quarum longitudinem    join rectangles of equal length with the square. The
quidem longitude quadrati primo descripti, latitudinem    length of any one of the four areas is equal to the
vero duo et dimidium, quae sunt numeri 10 quarta          length of the side of the square ab, and the breadth
                                                          of each is 2 12 , as the quarter of ten. The four areas
pars, demonstrant. Quatuor igitur areae laterum aequedistantium
primo quadrato a b applicantur. Quarum singularum then cdef are joined to the four sides of the square
longitudo longitudini vnius radicis quadrati a b aequalis ab. Now it is evident that the length of each side
erit, latitudo etiam singularum 2 et medium, vt iam       of the four areas is equal to the length of one root
                                                                             √
  23
       3x + 4 = x2 ; 12 of 3 is 1 12 , (1 12 )2 = 2 14 , 2 41 + 4 = 6 14 ,       6 14 = 2 12 ; 2 21 + 1 12 = 4, the root.
                                                                                                                            √
  24
   The solution of the general type bx + n = ax2 , reduced by division to ab x + na = x2 , is x =                                    ) + na + 2a
                                                                                                                                   b 2
                                                                                                                                ( 2a           b
                                                                                                                                                 , and
only the positive value of the radical is taken.
25                                                              Al-Khwarizmi’s Algebra — Bilingual Edition


dictum est, demonstrat. Sunt autem hae areae 10 c       of the square ab, and the breadth of each is 2 12 , as
d e f. Ex hoc igitur quod diximus, sit area laterum     has been stated. These four areas represent the ten
inaequalium, quae similiter ponuntur ignota, in cuius roots.
videlicet quatuor angulis quorum vniuscuiusque quantitas
areae, quam 2 et dimidium cum duobus et dimidio
multiplicata perficiunt, imperfectionem maioris seu
totius areae ostendunt.
     Vnde fit vt circunductionem areae maioris, cum         Out of this, according to what we have said, comes
adiectione duorum et dimidii cum duobus et dimidio an area with four sides, which is similarly put as un-
quatuor vicibus multiplicatorum compleamus, generatknown, in each of whose four corners the amount
autem haec tota multiplicatio 25. Et iam manifestum of the area which 2 12 multiplied by 2 21 makes, indi-
est, quoniam primum quadratum, quod substantiam cates the imperfection of the larger or whole area.
significat, et quatuor areae ipsum quadratum circundantes,
                                                        Hence it is that we complete the drawing of the larger
39 perficiunt, quibus quando 25, hoc est quatuor        area by adding 2 12 multiplied by 2 21 four times; and
minora quadrata, quae scilicet super quatuor angulos this whole multiplication gives 25. Now it is evi-
quadrati a b ponuntur, adiecerimus, quadratum maius,dent that the first square, which indicates the square,
G H vocatum, circunductione complebitur. Vnde etiam and the four areas surrounding that square, make
haec tota numeri summa vsque ad 64 excrescet, cuius 39; and when we add 25, that is, the four smaller
summae radicem octonarius obtinet numerus, quo          squares which are placed at the four corners of the
etiam vnum eius latus compleri probatur. Igitur vbi     square ab, the drawing of the larger square, called
ex numero octonario quartam partem numeri denarii, GH, will be completed. Hence also the whole sum
sicut in extremitatibus quadrati maioris G H ponuntur, of numbers will increase to 64, of which sum the
subtraxerimus bis, 3 ex ipsius latere manebunt. Quinque root 8 indicates one number, by which one side of
ergo ex octo subtractis, 3 manere necesse est; quae     the larger square is also proved to be completed.
                                                        Therefore when we subtract twice the fourth part
simul vni lateri quadrati primi, quod est a b, aequiparantur.
Haec igitur 3 quadrati vnam radicem, hoc est vnam       of the number ten, as placed at the extremities of
radicem substantiae propositae: nouenarius deinde the larger square GH, from 8, there will remain 3
numerus ipsam substantiam exprimit.                     on the side of it. Five then being subtracted from 8,
                                                        3 must necessarily remain, which equal one side of
                                                        the first square, which is ab. These 3 represent one
                                                        root of the square, that is one root of the proposed
                                                        square: then 9 indicates the square itself.
     Ergo numerum denarium mediamus, et alteram             We halve the number ten and multiply the half
eius medietatem cum seipsa multiplicamus, deinde        by itself, then add the whole product of the mul-
totum multiplicationis productum numero 39 adiicimus,   tiplication to the number 39, that the drawing of
vt maioris quadrati G H circunductio compleatur. the larger square GH may be completed. For the
Nam eius quatuor angulorum diminutio totam huius diminution of its four corners rendered the draw-
quadrati circunductionem imperfectam reddebat. ing of this square imperfect. It is manifest, indeed,
Manifestum enim est, quod quarta pars omnis numeri that the fourth part of any number multiplied by its
cum suo aequali, ac deinde cum quatuor multiplicata, equal and then by four, produces the same number
eandem perficiat numerum, quem medietas numeri which the half of the number produces when mul-
cum seipsa multiplicata, perficit. Igitur si radicum    tiplied by itself. Therefore if the half of the roots is
                                                        multiplied by itself, the sum of this multiplication
medietas cum seipsa multiplicetur, huius multiplicationis
summa, multiplicationem quartae partis cum seipsa will equal the multiplication of the fourth part by
ac deinde cum quatuor multiplicatae, sufficienter       itself and then by four, or will equal it or cancel it.
euacuet, adaequabit vel delebit.
     Ad hoc etiam idem demonstrandum, altera datur          For this also another figure is given to demon-
formula, quae talis est. Quadrate a b substantiam       strate the same thing, which is as follows. We add
significante aequalitatem decem radicum addimus; to the square ab, representing the square, the equiv-
has radices deinde per medium diuidamus, venient        alent of ten roots; then we halve these roots, giving
5, ex quibus duas areas ad duo latera quadrati a b      5, from which we construct two areas at the two
constituamus, hae autem vocentur a g et b d, et erit    sides of the square ab. Let these be called ag and
vtriusque vtraque latitudo vni lateri quadrati a b      bd, and the breadth of each of them will be equal to
aequalis; vtramque denique longitudinem numerus one side of the square ab, while the length of each is
                                                        completed by the number five. It remains now for
quinarius adimplebit. Superest iam, vt ex multiplicatione
5 cum 5, quae medietatem radicum quas ad duo            us to make a square from the multiplication of 5 by
                                                        5, which is the half of the roots which we added to
latera quadrati prioris substantiam significantis, addidimus,
quadratum faciamus. Vnde iam manifestum est, quod the two sides of the first square representing the
Latin Text & English Translation                                                                                26


duae areae, quae supra duo latera ponuntur, et quae square. Whence it is now manifest that the two
10 radices substantiae significant, simul cum quadrato areas which are placed above the two sides, and
priori, quod est substantia, 39 ex numero adimpleant. which represent the 10 roots of the square, together
Manifestum etiam, quod area maioris seu totius quadrati    with the first square, which is the square, complete
per multiplicationem 5 cum 5 perficiatur. Hoc ergo         39 in number. It is manifest also that the area of the
quadratum perficiatur, atque ad perfectionem eius          larger or whole square is completed by the multipli-
numerus 25 ad priora 39 adiiciatur: tota igitur haec       cation of 5 by 5. Let this square then be completed,
summa vsque ad 64 excrescet. Nunc summae huius             and to complete it let the number 25 be added to the
radicem quadratam, quae vnum latus quadrati maiorisprevious 39: therefore this whole sum will increase
25 designat, accipiamus, atque inde aequalitatem           to 64. Now let us take the square root of this sum,
eius quod ei addidimus, hoc est 5, subtrahamus, et         which represents one side of the larger square, 25,
manebunt 3; quae latus quadrati a b hoc est vnam           and from it let us subtract the equivalent of what
radicem substantiae propositae complere probantur. we added to it, that is 5, and 3 will remain; which
Tria igitur huius substantiae sunt radix; et substantia prove to complete one side of the square ab, that is,
nouem.                                                     one root of the proposed square. Therefore three
                                                           is the root of this square; and the square is nine.
                                                                Concerning a square and drachmas equal
           De substantia et drachmis res                   to things. A square and 21 drachmas are equal
                     coaequentibus.                        to 10 things. This proposition or question was pro-
                                                           posed in the fifth chapter, of which the demonstra-
               Demonstration of Chapter V
                                                           tion is here taught. I put, therefore, the square ab,
                                                           which has unknown sides, for the square, and I ap-
      Substantia et 21 drachmae 10 rebus aequiparantur. ply to it a rectangular parallelogram, of which each
Propositio haec seu quaestio in capite quinto proposita breadth is equal to one side of the square ab, and of
fuit, cuius hic demonstratio docetur. Quadratum igitur which each length represents the half of the things
a b, quod latera habet ignota, substantiam pono, or roots. Then indeed I constitute the sum of this
atque ei parallelogrammum rectangulum, cuius vtraque       rectangle as 21 from the numbers, which number
latitude vni lateri quadrati a b aequalis sit, cuiusque is proposed with the square itself. This area or rect-
longitude vtraque rerum seu radicum medietatem             angle bg is inscribed, whose breadth gd is known
referat, applico. Deinde vero huius rectanguli summamat the same time; therefore the length of the two
21 ex numeris constituo, qui numerus cum ipsa substantia   areas joined together terminates in hd. And it is
propositus est. Haec autem area vel rectangulum            now manifest that this length obtains the number
b g inscribitur, cuius simul latitude g d dinoscitur, ten, since every quadrilateral area with right an-
longitude ergo duarum arearum inuicem coniunctarum,        gles, from the multiplication of its side with unity
in h d terminatur. Et iam manifestum est quod haec         once, obtains one root: and if with the number two,
longitude denarium obtinet numerum, quoniam omnistwo roots of the same area are born.
area quadrilatera et rectorum angulorum, ex multiplicatione
sui lateris cum vnitate semel, vnam obtinet radicem:
et si cum binarie numero, duae eiusdem areae nascuntur
radices.
      Quoniam igitur prime sic proposuit, vna substantia        Since therefore it was proposed in the first place,
et 21 drachmae, 10 radicibus aequiparantur, manifestum     one square and 21 drachmas are equal to 10 roots,
est, quod longitude lateris h d in denario terminatur it is manifest that the length of the side hd termi-
numero, quia latus h b vnam substantiae radicem            nates in the number ten, because the side hb ob-
obtinet, latus igitur h d 10 ostendit. Vnde et linea e     tains one root of the square, therefore the side hd
h lineae e d fiet aequalis, atque ducta ex puncto e        shows 10. Whence also the line eh will be made
linea perpendiculari e t: haec eadem perpendicularis equal to the line ed, and having drawn from the
ipsi h a lineae aequalis erit. Lineae ergo e t portionem, point e a perpendicular line et: this same perpen-
quae ipsaque d e linea breuior est, in rectum adiicio      dicular will be equal to the line ha. Therefore I add
e c, et fiet linea t c aequalis t g lineae, vnde quadratum to the line et the portion by which it is shorter than
t l, quod ex multiplicatione medietatis radicum cum        the line de, in a straight line ec, and the line tc will
se ipsa multiplicatae, id est ex multiplicatione quinarii be made equal to the line tg, whence the square
cum quinario (in hoc casu) colligitur, nobis eueniet. tl, which from the multiplication of the half of the
                                                           roots multiplied by itself, that is from the multipli-
                                                           cation of five by five (in this case), is collected, will
                                                           come to us.
      Et iam manifestum etiam est, quoniam area b g             And it is now also manifest, since the area bg,
21, quae substantiae addidimus, in se obtinet, ex ea       21, which we added to the square, contains in itself,
27                                                                 Al-Khwarizmi’s Algebra — Bilingual Edition


igitur b g per lineam t c, quae est vnum latus areae      from it therefore through bg by the line tc, which is
t l extrahamus atque ex eadem area b g aream b t          one side of the area tl, let us extract and from the
minuamus, deinde vero super lineam e c quae est           same area bg let us diminish the area bt, then in-
in quo linea t c c lineam a h in quantitate deuincit, deed above the line ec, which is that by which the
quadratum e n m c ponamus. Vnde et iam manifestum, line tc surpasses the line ah in quantity, let us place
cum linea t c aequalis sit linea l c, nam ipsae in        the square enmc. Whence also it is now manifest,
quadrato t l aequales protenduntur, similiter et linea since the line tc is equal to the line lc, for they are
c c lineae m c aequalis, quia ipsae quadratum e m         extended as equals in the square tl, similarly also
aequali dimensione circundant: aequalium igitur           the line cc is equal to the line mc, because they sur-
ab aequalibus lineis subtractione facta, linea t c lineae round the square em with equal dimension: there-
l m aequalis relinquetur quod est notandum.               fore, subtraction having been made from equals by
                                                          equals, the line tc will be left equal to the line lm,
                                                          which is to be noted.
     Rursus manifestum est, quoniam linea g d aequalis        Again it is manifest, since the line gd is equal to
est lineae a h, cum ipsae in latitudine areae h g aequali the line ah, because they are extended in breadth
dimensione tenduntur, sed linea a h aequalis est          with equal dimension of the area hg, but the line
lineae h b cum ipsae in vno quadrato appareant. ah is equal to the line hb because they appear in one
Item quoniam linea g l aequalis est lineae d e, cum       square. Likewise since the line gl is equal to the line
ipsae in vno quadrato reperiantur aequales, sed linea de, because they are found equal in one square, but
d e aequalis est h e, cum ipsae decem radices per         the line de is equal to he, because they divide the
medium diuidant; linea igitur d l residuum lineae         ten roots by half; therefore the line dl, the residue
g l, lineae e b ex linea e h residuae aequalis erit: of the line gl, will be equal to the line eb, the residue
atque tandem, cum linea t e lineae l m ex superiori       from the line eh: and at last, since the line te is not
demonstratione, non sit inaequalis, area quam linea unequal to the line lm from the above demonstra-
t e et e b circundant, comprehensae sub l m et d l        tion, the area which the lines te and eb surround
lineis areae aequalis erit. Area igitur t b aequalis      will be equal to the area comprehended under the
est m d areae.                                            lines lm and dl. Therefore the area tb is equal to the
                                                          area md.
     Et iam manifestum est, quoniam quadratum t l             And it is now manifest, since the square tl con-
25 in se continet, cum ergo ex eodem quadrato t l         tains 25 in itself, when therefore from the same
areas d t et m d, quae videlicet duabus areis g e et      square tl we shall have subtracted the areas dt and
t b, 20 et vnum in se continentibus, sunt aequales, md, which are evidently equal to the two areas ge
subtraxerimus, quadratum n c nobis manebit, qui           and tb, containing 20 and one in themselves, the
simul numerum, qui est inter 25 et 21, obtinet. Et        square nc will remain to us, which at the same time
hic numerus est quaternarius, cuius videlicet radicem obtains the number which is between 25 and 21.
duo designant, quae latus e c adimplent. Hoc autem        And this number is four, of which the root two des-
latus aequale est lineae c b, quoniam e c aequale est     ignates, which fill up the side ec. This side is equal
d l lateri, cum ipsa in latitudine areae d c aequalia     to the line cb, since ec is equal to the side dl, because
protendantur. Iam manifestum est, quoniam d l aequalis    they are extended as equals in the breadth of the
est lineae e b, quando igitur e b quae sunt duo, ex       area dc. It is now manifest, since dl is equal to the
e h, quae sunt radicum medietas, quam quinarius           line eb, when therefore we shall have taken away
ostendit numerus, abstulerimus, linea b h ternarium eb, which are two, from eh, which are the half of
ostendens numerum restabit. Ternarius igitur numerusthe roots, which the number five shows, the line bh
radicem primae demonstrat substantiae.                    showing the number three will remain. Therefore
                                                          the number three shows the root of the first square.
     Quod si contra lineam e c lineae e h, quae medietatem But if on the other hand we shall have added
radicum continet, addiderimus, colligentur 7, quae        the line ec to the line eh, which contains the half of
lineam t h ostendunt. Et tunc radix substantiae maior the roots, 7 will be collected, which show the line
restat constituta, quam substantiam 49 adimplent.         th. And then the greater root of the square remains
                                                          established, which 49 complete.
Latin Text & English Translation   28
Rules Corresponding to the Six
     Chapters of Algebra




              29
31                                                        Al-Khwarizmi’s Algebra — Bilingual Edition


                         REGULE 6 CAPITULIS ALGABRE CORRESPONDENTES

                       Rules Corresponding to the Six Chapters of Algebra

     Sex sunt modi de quibus, quantum ad numeros pertinet, sufficienter diximus.
     We have said enough, says Al-Khowarizmi, so far as numbers are concerned, about the
     six types of equations.

    Rule I. When squares are equal to roots, divide the number of roots by the number of squares;
the quotient gives one root.
    Rule II. When squares are equal to numbers, divide the number of numbers by the number
of squares; the quotient gives one root, and the square of this root is the required square.
    Rule III. When roots are equal to numbers, divide the number of numbers by the number of
roots; the quotient gives one root.
    Rule IV. When squares and roots are equal to numbers, halve the roots, square the half, add
this square to the numbers, extract the square root of the sum, and subtract the half of the roots;
the remainder is one root.
    Rule V. When squares and numbers are equal to roots, halve the roots, square the half; if
the numbers are less than this square, subtract the numbers from the square, extract the root
of the remainder, and subtract this root from the half of the roots; the remainder is one root. If
the numbers are greater than the square, the problem is impossible. If the numbers equal the
square, the half of the roots is one root.
    Rule VI. When roots and numbers are equal to squares, halve the roots, square the half, add
the numbers, extract the root of the sum, and add the half of the roots; the sum is one root.
Latin Text & English Translation   32
Addita Quaedam pro Declaratione Al-
gebrae

                     SOME ADDITIONS IN EXPLANATION OF THE ALGEBRA
                          (Selections from Scheybl’s Additions)

 Hactenus de regulis Algebrae satis dictum est. Nunc vero, vt plenior fiat intellectus,
 quaedam additiones apponendae sunt.
 Hitherto enough has been said about the rules of Algebra. Now, however, that a fuller
 understanding may be obtained, certain additions are to be appended.

 Primo sciendum est, quod omnis numerus constat ex vnitatibus, et quod vnitatis multiplicatio
 in seipsam semper vnitatem producit. Vnde etiam sequitur, quod omnis numeri quadratus
 ex multiplicatione vnitatum producitur.
 First it must be known that every number consists of units, and that the multiplication
 of unity by itself always produces unity. Whence also it follows that the square of every
 number is produced from the multiplication of units.

 Secundo notandum est, quod in omni operatione Algebrae, primum oportet vt omnes
 substantiae ad vnam reducantur substantiam, omnesque radices ad vnam radicem,
 et omnes numeri ad vnum numerum.
 Secondly it is to be noted that in every algebraic operation, first it is necessary that all
 squares be reduced to one square, all roots to one root, and all numbers to one number.

 Tertio, sciendum est quod tres sunt modi simplices et tres compositi, vt in textu dictum
 est. Modus autem cognoscendi vtrum aequatio possibilis sit vel impossibilis, est ille
 qui in capite quinto traditur, videlicet quando medietas radicum in seipsa multiplicata,
 productum maius est numero cum substantia proposito: tunc quaestio est possibilis. Si
 vero productum minus fuerit numero proposito, quaestio est impossibilis. Si aequale,
 tunc radix aequalis est medietati radicum.
 Thirdly, it must be known that there are three simple types and three composite types,
 as has been said in the text. The method, however, of knowing whether an equation is
 possible or impossible is that which is handed down in the fifth chapter, namely when
 the half of the roots multiplied by itself, the product is greater than the number proposed
 with the square: then the question is possible. But if the product is less than the proposed
 number, the question is impossible. If equal, then the root is equal to the half of the roots.




                                              33
Latin Text & English Translation   34
Latin Glossary




      35
37                                                        Al-Khwarizmi’s Algebra — Bilingual Edition


                                          LATIN GLOSSARY
                       With variations from classical usage noted in the text


     Latin Term                Usage and Notes
     adiectio, -onis           addition; used for the operation of adding to both sides
     aequedistans              parallel (lit. equally distant); classical Latin would use paral-
                               lelus
     aequiparare               to equal, to be equal to
     almucabola                transliteration of Arabic al-muqabala, the operation of balanc-
                               ing/reduction
     area, -ae                 area, surface; used geometrically
     circumductio, -onis       the bounding line, perimeter
     coaequari                 to be equal to; frequent in the text
     colligere                 to collect, sum up
     completus, -a, -um        completed; “completing the square”
     coniungere                to join, add
     circundare                to surround (variant of circumdare)
     decurrere                 to run down, extend to
     dimidiare                 to halve (mediare is classical)
     diminutio, -onis          subtraction, diminution
     diminuere                 to diminish, subtract
     drachma, -ae              drachma, unit of number
     excedere                  to exceed, be greater than
     excreuere                 to increase, grow beyond
     figura, -ae               figure, shape
     imperfectus, -a, -um      incomplete (used of the incomplete square)
     inuestigatio, -onis       investigation, method of solution
     latitudo, -inis           breadth, width
     longitude, -inis          length (for classical longitudo)
     mediare                   to halve; used frequently
     medietas, -atis           half, moiety
     multiplicatio, -onis      multiplication
     numerus, -i               number
     oppositio, -onis          opposition, the operation of al-muqabala
     ostendere                 to show, indicate, represent
     perficere                 to complete, make perfect
     ponere                    to place, put, suppose
     procreare                 to produce, generate
     pronunciare               to state, express in words
     proportio, -onis          proportion
     quadratum, -i             square
     radix, -icis              root; also used for the unknown quantity
     restauratio, -onis        restoration, the operation of al-jabr
     rumbus                    square (Arabic al-rub’)
     similitudo, -inis         similitude, likeness; used for “the like of”
     substantia, -ae           substance, square of the unknown
     subtrahere                to subtract
     vnitas, -atis             unity, the number one
Latin Text & English Translation                                              38




                                        End of Bilingual Edition

                            Printed by XeLaTeX from critical edition source
