                                                                                                          31


sheaf of ideals of OX |Vi , being the inverse image of e  an under the canonical injection Vi → X (0, 5.1.4);
an |Vi is thus of the form e
e                            ani , where ani is an ideal of Ai (1.3.7). Since Ai is Noetherian, the sequence
(ani ) is stationary for all i, whence the proposition.                                                   □
   We note that the above argument proves also that if X is a Noetherian prescheme, then every increas-
ing sequence of coherent sheaves of ideals of OX is stationary.
Proposition (6.1.4). — Every subprescheme of a Noetherian (resp. locally Noetherian) prescheme is Noe-
therian (resp. locally Noetherian).
Proof. It sufﬁces to give a proof for a Noetherian prescheme X; further, by deﬁnition (6.1.1), we can
also restrict to the case where X is an afﬁne scheme. Since every subprescheme of X is a closed
subprescheme of a prescheme induced on an open subset (4.1.3), we can restrict to the case of a
subprescheme Y, either closed or induced on an open subset of X. The proof in the case where Y
is closed is immediate, since if A is the ring of X, we know that Y is an afﬁne scheme given by the
ring A/J, where J is an ideal of A (4.2.3); since A is Noetherian (6.1.3), so too is A/J.
   Now suppose that Y is open in X; the underlying space of Y is Noetherian (6.1.2), hence quasi-
compact, and thus a ﬁnite union of open subsets D ( f i ) ( f i ∈ A); everything reduces to showing the I | 142
proposition in the case where Y = D ( f ) with f ∈ A. But then Y is an afﬁne scheme whose ring is
isomorphic to A f (1.3.6); since A is Noetherian (6.1.3), so too is A f .                            □
(6.1.5). We note that the product of two Noetherian S-preschemes is not necessarily Noetherian, even
if the preschemes are afﬁne, since the tensor product of two Noetherian algebras is not necessarily
a Noetherian ring (cf. (6.3.8)).
Proposition (6.1.6). — If X is a Noetherian prescheme, the nilradical NX of OX is nilpotent.
Proof. We can in fact cover X with a ﬁnite number of afﬁne open subsets Ui , and it sufﬁces to prove
that there exist integers ni such that (NX |Ui )ni = 0; if n is the largest of the ni , then we will have
NXn = 0. We can thus restrict to the case where X = Spec( A) is afﬁne, with A a Noetherian ring; by
(5.1.1) and (1.3.13), it sufﬁces to observe that the nilradical of A is nilpotent ([?, p. 127, cor. 4]). □

Corollary (6.1.7). — Let X be a Noetherian prescheme; for X to be an afﬁne scheme, it is necessary and
sufﬁcient that Xred be afﬁne.
Proof. This follows from (6.1.6) and (5.1.10).                                                            □
Lemma (6.1.8). — Let X be a topological space, x a point of X, and U an open neighbourhood of x having
only a ﬁnite number of irreducible components. Then there exists a neighbourhood V of x such that every
open neighbourhood of x contained in V is connected.
Proof. Let Ui (1 ⩽ i ⩽ m) be the irreducible components of U not containing x; the complement
(in U) of the union of the Ui is an open neighbourhood V of x inside U, and thus so too in X; it is
also, incidentally, the complement (in X) of the union of the irreducible components of X that do
not contain x (0, 2.1.6). So let W be an open neighbourhood of x contained in V. The irreducible
components of W are the intersections with W of the irreducible components of U that meet W
(0, 2.1.6), so these components contain x; since they are connected, so too is W.                □
Corollary (6.1.9). — A locally Noetherian topological space is locally connected (which implies, amongst
other things, that its connected components are open).
Proposition (6.1.10). — Let X be a locally Noetherian topological space. The following conditions are
equivalent.
    (a) The irreducible components of X are open.
    (b) The irreducible components of X are exactly its connected components.
     (c) The connected components of X are irreducible.
    (d) Two distinct irreducible components of X have an empty intersection.
Finally, if X is a prescheme, then these conditions are also equivalent to
    (e) For every x ∈ X, Spec(Ox ) is irreducible (or, in other words, the nilradical of Ox is prime).
                                                                                                     32


Proof. It is immediate that (a) implies (b), because an irreducible space is connected, and (a) implies
that the irreducible components of X are the sets that are both open and closed. It is trivial that (b)
implies (c); conversely, a closed set F containing                                                   □
